 Corrigendum to “Toxicokinetics of perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS), perfluorohexane-1-sulphonic acid (PFHxS), and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) in male and female Hsd:Sprague Dawley SD rats after intravenous and gavage administration” [Toxicol. Rep. 6 (2019) 645–655] - PMC Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Log in Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Search… Search NCBI Primary site navigation Search Logged in as: Dashboard Publications Account settings Log in Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice Toxicol Rep . 2021 Feb 18;8:365. doi: 10.1016/j.toxrep.2021.02.001 Search in PMC Search in PubMed View in NLM Catalog Add to search Corrigendum to “Toxicokinetics of perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS), perfluorohexane-1-sulphonic acid (PFHxS), and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) in male and female Hsd:Sprague Dawley SD rats after intravenous and gavage administration” [Toxicol. Rep. 6 (2019) 645–655] MC Huang MC Huang a Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, United States Find articles by MC Huang a , AL Dzierlenga AL Dzierlenga a Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, United States Find articles by AL Dzierlenga a , VG Robinson VG Robinson a Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, United States Find articles by VG Robinson a , S Waidyanatha S Waidyanatha a Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, United States Find articles by S Waidyanatha a , MJ DeVito MJ DeVito a Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, United States Find articles by MJ DeVito a , MA Eifrid MA Eifrid b Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, OH, 43201, United States Find articles by MA Eifrid b , CA Granville CA Granville b Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, OH, 43201, United States Find articles by CA Granville b , ST Gibbs ST Gibbs b Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, OH, 43201, United States Find articles by ST Gibbs b , CR Blystone CR Blystone a Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, United States Find articles by CR Blystone a, * Author information Article notes Copyright and License information a Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709, United States b Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, OH, 43201, United States ⁎ Corresponding author. blystonecr@niehs.nih.gov Collection date 2021. PMC Copyright notice PMCID: PMC7902757 PMID: 33665134 This corrects the article " Toxicokinetics of perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS), perfluorohexane-1-sulphonic acid (PFHxS), and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) in male and female Hsd:Sprague Dawley SD rats after intravenous and gavage administration " in volume 6 on page 645. The authors regret that an error in Tables 2, 3, and 4 was made. The AUC and AUC/Dose values are labelled as μM*hr or μM*hr/mg/kg, respectively, but the units should be mM*hr or mM*hr/mg/kg, respectively. The authors apologise for any inconvenience caused. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Articles from Toxicology Reports are provided here courtesy of Elsevier ACTIONS View on publisher site PDF (229.4 KB) Cite Collections Permalink PERMALINK Copy RESOURCES Similar articles Cited by other articles Links to NCBI Databases Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection * Choose a collection Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Follow NCBI NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) NCBI on Facebook NCBI on LinkedIn NCBI on GitHub NCBI RSS feed Connect with NLM NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) NLM on Facebook NLM on YouTube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov Back to Top 