 pmc Environ Health Perspect Environ Health Perspect 253 envhper 0330411 EHP Environmental Health Perspectives 0091-6765 1552-9924 American Chemical Society PMC10328216 PMC10328216.1 10328216 10328216 37418334 10.1289/EHP11885 EHP11885 1 Review A State-of-the-Science Review of Interactions of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) with Renal Transporters in Health and Disease: Implications for Population Variability in PFAS Toxicokinetics https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9709-6197 Niu Shan 1 Cao Yuexin 1 Chen Ruiwen 1 Bedi Megha 1 Sanders Alison P. 2 Ducatman Alan 3 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5521-7862 Ng Carla 1 2 1 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 2 Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Department of Occupational and Environmental Health Sciences, West Virginia University , Morgantown, West Virginia, USA Address correspondence to Carla Ng, 203 Benedum Hall, 3700 O’Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA 15261 USA. Email address: carla.ng@pitt.edu 7 7 2023 7 2023 131 7 439785 076002 20 7 2022 02 6 2023 16 6 2023 07 07 2023 08 07 2023 27 07 2023 https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/about-ehp/license EHP is an open-access journal published with support from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health. All content is public domain unless otherwise noted. Background: Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are ubiquitous in the environment and have been shown to cause various adverse health impacts. In animals, sex- and species-specific differences in PFAS elimination half-lives have been linked to the activity of kidney transporters. However, PFAS molecular interactions with kidney transporters are still not fully understood. Moreover, the impact of kidney disease on PFAS elimination remains unclear. Objectives: This state-of-the-science review integrated current knowledge to assess how changes in kidney function and transporter expression from health to disease could affect PFAS toxicokinetics and identified priority research gaps that should be addressed to advance knowledge. Methods: We searched for studies that measured PFAS uptake by kidney transporters, quantified transporter-level changes associated with kidney disease status, and developed PFAS pharmacokinetic models. We then used two databases to identify untested kidney transporters that have the potential for PFAS transport based on their endogenous substrates. Finally, we used an existing pharmacokinetic model for perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in male rats to explore the influence of transporter expression levels, glomerular filtration rate (GFR), and serum albumin on serum half-lives. Results: The literature search identified nine human and eight rat kidney transporters that were previously investigated for their ability to transport PFAS, as well as seven human and three rat transporters that were confirmed to transport specific PFAS. We proposed a candidate list of seven untested kidney transporters with the potential for PFAS transport. Model results indicated PFOA toxicokinetics were more influenced by changes in GFR than in transporter expression. Discussion: Studies on additional transporters, particularly efflux transporters, and on more PFAS, especially current-use PFAS, are needed to better cover the role of transporters across the PFAS class. Remaining research gaps in transporter expression changes in specific kidney disease states could limit the effectiveness of risk assessment and prevent identification of vulnerable populations. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP11885 pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes Supplemental Material is available online ( https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP11885 ). A.D. assisted with the design and implementation of the C8 Health Project. He has testified on behalf of attorneys for three communities with PFAS water contamination where residents have sought medical screening. The remaining authors declare they have nothing to disclose. Note to readers with disabilities: EHP strives to ensure that all journal content is accessible to all readers. However, some figures and Supplemental Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to the complexity of the information being presented. If you need assistance accessing journal content, please contact ehpsubmissions@niehs.nih.gov . Our staff will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within 3 working days. Introduction Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), a class of thousands of manufactured chemicals with at least one perfluorinated carbon atom, have been ubiquitously detected in the environment, 1 , 2 humans, 3 – 5 and wildlife 5 worldwide. Of concern, identified health outcomes in humans and animals associated with specific PFAS exposures include altered immune function, 6 liver injury, 7 , 8 kidney disease, 9 and adverse reproductive and developmental outcomes. 10 In humans and animals, absorbed PFAS were shown to undergo key physiological processes, such as enterohepatic circulation, including secretion into bile and eventual reabsorption into the cell by the intestine, 11 , 12 as well as kidney reabsorption and secretion. 13 PFAS can be excreted from the body through urine and feces. 14 Previous studies have shown that PFAS bioaccumulation is related to their binding to serum albumin 15 – 17 and to fatty acid-binding proteins (FABPs) 18 and cell membrane transport 19 – 22 in various organs and tissues, including the liver, gut, kidney, and brain. High binding affinities to serum albumin 23 and FABPs 24 were observed for long-chain PFAS (e.g., C6–C11) compared with short-chain PFAS (e.g., C &lt; 6 ). For cell membrane transport, passive diffusion and protein-facilitated transport have been considered primary mechanisms for cellular uptake or secretion of PFAS. 13 , 25 – 27 Studies have identified a number of transport proteins located at the surface of endothelial cells responsible for PFAS cellular transport in humans 25 , 27 and rats. 13 , 25 – 27 Throughout this review, transporters are named using all capital letters for human transporters or using one capital letter followed by lowercase letters for animal transporters. 28 Known PFAS transporters include organic anion transporters (OATs/Oats) 25 – 27 , 29 and organic anion-transporting polypeptides (OATPs/Oatps). 27 , 29 PFAS can bind to these transporters and achieve transmembrane transport (e.g., uptake into the cell or secretion from the cell) through the conformational changes of transporters. 29 Studies have shown that the contribution of passive diffusion to the total PFAS uptake in cells varies between ∼ 5 % and 60%, 21 , 22 , 25 – 27 , 30 , 31 indicating that transporter-facilitated uptake is an important and often dominant component of PFAS transport regardless of cell type. In animals, sex- and species-specific differences in elimination half-lives of PFAS have been linked to renal elimination, particularly the activity of kidney transport proteins and polypeptides for organic anions. 20 Renal elimination of PFAS includes one passive diffusion process, namely glomerular filtration, and two active pathways, namely tubular secretion and reabsorption ( Figure 1 ). 20 Secretion and reabsorption of PFAS in the kidney are mediated via renal transporters expressed on the basolateral (facing the blood) and the apical (facing the urine) membranes of the proximal tubular cells. 20 Renal transporters can facilitate either uptake or efflux, or both under certain conditions. 25 – 27 , 30 An inverted U-shaped distribution has been reported between human serum PFAS concentrations and declining estimated glomerular filtration rates (eGFR), as eGFR changes from healthy kidney function through the advancing stages of kidney disease. 32 This inverted U-shaped pattern differs by sex. 32 One possible reason for this observed pattern may relate to the retained activities, during progressive kidney failure, of renal transporters that actively mediate PFAS secretion and reabsorption. 33 Another possible explanation is that early subclinical kidney damage can manifest initially as glomerular hyperfiltration as an adaptive response to nephron injury or loss, which may precede clinical functional decline. 34 , 35 The inverted U-shaped pattern could also be due to a combination of kidney disease causation due to PFAS (high PFAS concentration leading to progression of the kidney disease 36 ) followed by enhanced excretion due to transporter failure in presence of albuminuria or moderate-to-severe declines in glomerular filtration. 32 Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of processes in renal PFAS clearance. Renal clearance of PFAS comprises glomerular filtration, tubular secretion, and tubular reabsorption. Note: PFAS, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances. Figure 1 is an illustration, depicting the processes in renal per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance clearance. From urine, through reabsorption, uptake, and efflux inside the proximal tubular cell, to blood. From blood, through glomerular filtration, uptake and efflux inside the proximal tubular cell, and secretion to urine. Previous studies have confirmed the role of renal transporters in facilitating PFAS transport in rats 21 , 26 , 30 , 31 , 37 , 38 and humans. 22 , 25 , 27 , 38 For example, Weaver et al. reported that Oat1 and Oat3 were involved in rat renal secretion of perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), and perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), whereas rat renal Oatp1a1 reportedly could contribute to the reabsorption of PFOA, PFNA, and perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA). 26 Nakagawa et al. concluded that both human and rat renal OAT1/Oat1 and OAT3/Oat3 facilitated PFOA transport to similar degrees, whereas neither human nor rat renal OAT2/Oat2 facilitated PFOA transport, indicating the difference between the PFOA half-lives in humans and rats is not likely attributable to differences in the affinities of these three renal transporters. 38 In contrast, OAT4 and urate transporter 1 (URAT1) were identified as key transporters in kidney reabsorption of PFOA in humans and, as a result, may contribute significantly to the long half-life of PFOA in humans. 27 However, these are a small subset of kidney transporters, considering the large number of kidney transporter superfamilies that exist 39 [i.e., the solute carrier ( SLC ) and the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette ( ABC ) gene families]. In addition, expression levels and functions of renal transporters can be altered in various kidney disease states, with disease-specific outcomes. 40 – 42 For example, expression levels of Oat1 were significantly decreased 24 h after ischemia/reperfusion–induced acute kidney injury (AKI) in rats, but returned to normal after 72 h. 43 Conversely, expression levels of Oat1 were not significantly changed during the first 2 wk following 5/6 nephrectomy (removal of one kidney first followed by two poles of the remaining kidney 1 wk later 41 ) in rats 44 but were significantly decreased after 6 wk. 45 To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have investigated the influence of altered renal transporter expression by kidney disease status on the renal elimination of PFAS. Previous observational studies have shown long half-lives of long-chain PFAS (i.e., C ≥ 6 ) in humans; for instance, mean human serum half-lives for PFOA ( C 8 ), perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS; C 8 ), and perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS; C 6 ) ranged from ∼ 2 to 3 , ∼ 3 to 4 , and ∼ 5 to 7 y, respectively. 46 – 51 In contrast, shorter human serum half-lives were observed for short-chain PFAS (e.g., C &lt; 6 ), with a mean half-life for perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS; C 4 ) of 44 d, and for perfluoropentane sulfonic acid (PFPeS; C 5 ) of 230 d. 52 Notably, an observational study by Li et al. 50 reported PFHxS half-lives were widely variable among 106 individuals, and the reason is still unknown. Sex differences were observed, with more rapid elimination in women for PFHxS and PFOS, but comparable elimination for PFOA. 50 Uncertainties in PFAS half-lives may exist because they are based on observations in groups with differing exposure patterns, such as retired fluorochemical workers and residents of contaminated communities with serum levels investigated after exposure via drinking water. These half-lives should be expected to differ from steady-state exposures, or even from declining PFAS background exposure, such as from food. 50 Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling can be ideal to address these questions and examine how renal transporter expression and changes in kidney function between healthy and diseased states could impact estimations of PFAS half-lives representing accumulation and elimination over time. Indeed, even in the case where PFAS exposure itself may instigate kidney disease, 9 , 32 , 53 if the impact of that disease on transporters is known, it can also be integrated into the PBPK modeling of changes in PFAS toxicokinetics. This review aimed to address how kidney function and the related expression of key transporters could affect PFAS toxicokinetics by facilitating their elimination and reabsorption. We first surveyed studies related to kidney transporters that mediate PFAS transport to summarize current knowledge. We then conducted a broader survey of other kidney transporters that could have the potential for molecular interactions with PFAS based on the similarity between PFAS and the transporters’ endogenous ligands. Additional literature was reviewed to provide existing knowledge about kidney transport proteins or mRNA expression levels based on known changes in characteristic disease states. Finally, we reviewed studies that developed PBPK models for PFAS and used the model developed by Cheng and Ng 13 to illustrate how changes in renal transporter expression levels, GFR, and serum albumin in specific kidney disease states could impact PFAS toxicokinetics. We highlighted key insights into population and interindividual variability in contaminant toxicokinetics that are critical to identifying particularly sensitive populations for public health interventions. Methods Literature Search We performed a literature review using the Web of Science, Scopus, and PubMed databases to locate studies focusing on PFAS, renal transporters, and PBPK models. We searched articles through 15 April 2023 with no lower limit on publication date, using the following search terms: a ) for PFAS interactions with renal transporters, the search terms were (“PFAS” OR “perfluoro” OR “PFOA” OR “PFOS” AND “renal transporters” OR “kidney” OR “drug transporters”); b ) for expression-level changes of renal transporters in kidney disease, the search terms were (“renal transporters” OR “drug transporters” and “kidney disease” OR “kidney failure” OR “AKI” OR “CKD”); and c ) for PFAS-related PBPK models, the search terms were (“PFAS” OR “perfluoro” OR “PFOA” OR “PFOS” AND “PBPK models”). Four terms for PFAS (i.e., PFAS, perfluoro, PFOA, and PFOS) and three terms for renal transporter (i.e., renal transporter, kidney, and drug transporter) were included to reduce the possibility of missing a potential study that fulfilled our inclusion criteria. We also used the Research Rabbit application (version 32.2.0), a citation-based literature mapping tool, for an additional search. Specifically, we imported the articles identified from Web of Science, Scopus, and PubMed databases and used Research Rabbit to identify other relevant articles; we then reviewed these articles to identify further publications related to our research questions. We conducted a search to create a candidate list of untested renal transporters with the potential to transport PFAS. Specifically, we first used a website-based transporter database included in the Guide to PHARMACOLOGY database 39 ( https://www.guidetopharmacology.org ; last accessed 12 April 2023) to identify transporters known to have fatty acids, bile acids, and phospholipids as substrates. We then conducted a literature search via Web of Science, Scopus, and PubMed for articles reporting transporters in tissues other than kidney that transport PFAS using the search terms (“PFAS” OR “perfluoro” OR “PFOA” OR “PFOS” AND “transporters” OR “transporting polypeptide” OR “drug transporters”). We excluded transporters already identified to transport PFAS in the kidney, as summarized in Table 1 . After selecting the potential transporters, we used the Human Protein Atlas database 56 ( https://www.proteinatlas.org ; last accessed 12 April 2023) to confirm their expression in the kidney. Given that resources for animal transporters were relatively limited, we included only human transporters in the candidate list. Table 1 Tissue distributions, sex and species differences of tested human, rat, and zebrafish renal transporters for PFAS. Gene name Protein name Tissue distribution a Sex difference b Species difference between human and rat b Human (source for tissue distribution: https://www.proteinatlas.org ) SLC22A6 OAT1 Kidney, brain, c endocrine tissue, c and GI tract c — N/N SLC22A7 OAT2 Broad distribution d except for lung, proximal digestive tract, pancreas, placenta, ovary (liver, kidney, and adipose have protein expression) — Y/N SLC22A8 OAT3 Kidney, brain, c endocrine tissues, c and GI tract c — N/N SLC51A/B OST α / β Broad distribution d (GI tract and kidney have protein expression) — / SLC22A11 OAT4 Kidney, placenta, epididymis, endocrine tissue, c GI tract, c liver, c and pancreas c — Y/Y SLC22A12 URAT1 Kidney, brain, c GI tract, c liver, c and adipose c — N/Y SLCO1A2 OATP1A2 Broad distribution except for adipose (all tissues have only mRNA expression according to the database) — N/N SLCO2B1 OATP2B1 Broad distribution (kidney, eye, adipose, and skin have only mRNA expression according to the database) — / SLC10A2 ASBT GI tract, kidney, c brain, c lung, c liver, c muscle, c skin, c and bone c — N/Y Rat (source for tissue distribution: https://www.solvobiotech.com/knowledge-center/transporters-a-z ) Human ortholog 54 SLC22A6 Oat1 Kidney — OAT1 SLC22A7 Oat2 Liver and kidney Y/N OAT2 SLC22A8 Oat3 Kidney — OAT3 ABCC2 Mrp2 Liver, kidney, and GI tract — MRP2 SLCO1A1 Oatp1a1/Oatp1 Liver and kidney Y/Y OATP1A2 SLC34A1 Npt2 Kidney — NPT2 SLC22A12 Urat1 Kidney — URAT1 SLC10A2 Asbt Kidney, bladder, and GI tract — ASBT Zebrafish (source for tissue distribution 55 ) SLCO1D1 Oatp1d1 Intestine, liver, brain, gills, muscle, kidney, and ovary — OATP1A Note: —, no information available; ABC, adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette gene family; ASBT/Asbt, apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter; GI, gastrointestinal; MRP/Mrp, multidrug resistance proteins; NPT/Npt, sodium–phosphate transporters; OAT/Oat, organic anion transporters; OATP/Oatp, organic anion-transporting polypeptides; OST, organic solute transporter; PFAS, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; SLC, solute carrier gene family; URAT/Urat, urate transporter. a Tissues with higher transporter expression levels are listed before others. b In these column, the first Y or N stands for yes or no for differences in physiology, and the second Y or N means yes or no for differences in PFAS toxicokinetics. c Transporter only has mRNA expression in that tissue according to the database. d “Broad distribution”: found in brain, eye, endocrine tissues, lung, proximal digestive tract, GI tract, liver and gallbladder, pancreas, kidney and urinary bladder, reproductive tissues, muscle, adipose, skin, and bone. 24 , 36 Study Selection All articles underwent an identical screening process with specified inclusion and exclusion criteria. The inclusion criteria were established based on the research question of interest, which focused on how renal transporter expression and changes in health and disease state could impact PFAS half-life estimates. Regardless of the type (e.g., human observational studies or in vivo, ex vivo, in vitro studies), studies were included if they a ) assessed the direct interaction between transporters and PFAS, b ) quantified the expression and changes of renal transporters in kidney diseases, or c ) developed PBPK models for PFAS. The exclusion criteria were that the studies a ) indirectly assessed the influence of renal transporters on PFAS (e.g., renal transporters inhibited by certain PFAS), b ) did not quantify the changes in renal transporter expression levels during kidney diseases, or c ) developed PBPK models for chemicals other than PFAS. Titles and abstracts of identified studies were scanned for eligibility by two reviewers, with any discrepancies resolved by a third reviewer. All full texts in English were then reviewed by two reviewers for final inclusion in the qualitative summary using the same inclusion and exclusion criteria, with a third reviewer again resolving discrepancies. The literature was complemented by identifying additional articles by analyzing the reference lists in various review articles. Data Extraction The following contents were extracted from the identified articles: a ) for PFAS interaction with renal transporters, renal transporter characteristics (type, localization, and function), PFAS (specific compounds tested), uptake pattern, and information on the methods used; b ) for expression-level changes of renal transporters as a result of kidney disease, renal transporter characteristics (type, localization, and function), changes in expression levels, the type of kidney disease, and information on the methods (e.g., in vivo , ex vivo , in vitro , or clinical); c ) for PFAS transporters expressed in tissues other than kidney, transporter characteristics (type, localization, and function); and d ) for PFAS-PBPK models, information on whether the models included transporter-specific mechanisms. Using an Existing Model to Explore the Influence of Kidney Disease on PFOA Toxicokinetics We used a PFOA-PBPK model for male rats, developed by Cheng and Ng 13 in Python (version 3.10.8) to explore the influence of changes in transporter expression levels, GFR, and serum albumin concentration on PFOA toxicokinetics. Details on the model development can be found in Cheng and Ng 13 ; an overview of the model is provided here. The Cheng and Ng model is a permeability-limited PBPK model that includes four kidney transporters [i.e., Oat 1, Oat 3, Oatp1a1, and organic solute transporter-alpha/beta (Ost α / β )], glomerular filtration using a parameter for GFR, and binding to serum albumin as mechanisms for PFOA toxicokinetics. 13 To model changes in the toxicokinetics in response to kidney disease, we reviewed reported changes from other published studies. Schneider et al. 43 reported that GFR was decreased to 5%, 15%, and 33% of levels in sham-operated rats in 6, 24, and 72 h, respectively, after ischemia/reperfusion–induced AKI. To model the potential impacts of kidney disease, we made the following adjustments to the Cheng and Ng model parameterization described in the original paper, we set a ) the clearance rate constant for Oat1 and Oat3 to 20% of the original model default value to simulate how changes in transporter levels during kidney disease could affect PFOA toxicokinetics in the male rat, b ) GFR to 33% and 5% of the original model default to simulate how changes in GFR during kidney disease could affect PFOA toxicokinetics, and c ) albumin concentration to 70% of the original model default value to simulate the influence of albumin decrease owing to albuminuria. For transporter levels, the changes of Oat1 and Oat3 expression at 6 wk in Figure 4A were used to represent the worst-case scenario. Results Current Knowledge of Renal Transporters for PFAS Transport We identified 508 papers based on our search terms and procedures. After exclusion of 498 papers because they did not report PFAS transport by renal transporters, 10 studies that directly assessed the uptake of PFAS by renal transporters were included in this review (Excel Table S1). Perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) were the most commonly investigated PFAS for their interaction with renal transporters. 21 , 26 , 30 , 31 , 37 , 38 Given that PFAAs are ionic compounds that are negatively charged when in aqueous environments (e.g., human fluids), renal transporters that have the ability to transport organic anions, such as OATs/Oats and URAT1/Urat1 from the SLC 22 gene family and OATP1A1/Oatp1a1 from the SLCO gene family, were among the first to be investigated for their potential PFAS transport. To the best of our knowledge, the first-reported direct investigation of PFAS transport by renal transporters was by Katakura et al., who confirmed that rat renal Oat3 (an uptake transporter located at the basolateral membrane facing blood) and Oatp1a1 (an uptake transporter located at the apical membrane facing urine) facilitated PFOA transport, whereas Npt2 (type II sodium-dependent phosphate transporter, an uptake transporter located at the apical membrane facing urine) did not. 30 An earlier study by Kudo et al. 37 provided indirect evidence for renal Oats (Oat2 and Oat3) facilitating PFOA transport by multiple regression analysis between plasma PFOA concentrations and Oats mRNA levels in rats. Subsequent studies of PFAS transport by renal transporters have accumulated, with 10 additional original research studies published since 2007. 21 , 22 , 25 – 27 , 30 , 31 , 38 , 57 , 58 Four gene families other than SLC22 25 , 26 , 30 , 38 , 57 and SLCO 22 , 27 , 30 , 31 were investigated for their role in PFAS transport, including SLC 10 (sodium–bile acid cotransporters), 21 SLC 34 (sodium–phosphate cotransporters), 30 SLC 51 (steroid-derived molecule transporters), 21 and ABCC (one of the five families in the ABC superfamily). 30 A review by Han et al. 20 summarized the knowledge of renal transporters for PFAS transport prior to 2011. In this subsection, we update that knowledge with four additionally identified renal transporters, specify the PFAS investigated to date, and expand information on the distribution of these transporters in other tissues, as well as whether the transporter could be responsible for sex or species differences ( Figure 2 and Table 1 ) by reviewing identified studies ( Table 2 ). In this review, the renal transporters investigated in previous studies were classified according to their expression localizations [i.e., basolateral (facing the blood) or apical membrane (facing the urine) of the proximal tubular cells] and their cellular transport roles (i.e., cellular uptake or cellular efflux). This grouping deliberately oversimplifies the complex processes of renal elimination; however, it helps summarize the mechanisms of PFAS renal transport. Specifically, the uptake role of transporters at the basolateral membrane and the efflux role of transporters at the apical membrane contribute to PFAS secretion (i.e., negative contribution to PFAS reabsorption). In contrast, the uptake role of transporters at the apical membrane and the efflux role of transporters at the basolateral membrane have negative contribution to PFAS secretion (i.e., positive contribution to PFAS reabsorption). Figure 2. (A) Human and (B) rat renal transporters that have been tested for PFAS transport summarized from previous studies using in vitro methods. *OATP2B1 was identified only by mRNA expression in kidney according to the Human Protein Atlas database. 56 Transporter-facilitated uptake was often the dominant component of PFAS transport given that contribution of passive diffusion to the total PFAS uptake in cells varies between 5% and 60%. 21 , 22 , 25 – 27 , 30 , 31 PFAS denoted by strikethrough text indicates that compound was evaluated but reported to not be transported by the transporter. PFAS superscripts denote literature sources, and details are provided in Table 2 . Note: PFAS, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; PFBS, perfluorobutane sulfonic acid; PFDA, perfluorodecanoic acid; PFHpA, perfluoroheptanoic acid; PFHxS, perfluorohexane sulfonate; PFNA, perfluorononanoic acid; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid; PFOS, perfluorooctane sulfonate. Figure 2A is an illustration, depicting a human proximal tubular cell. From urine, the following things are transported into the proximal tubular cell through the apical membrane, P F O A begin superscript 2, 4, 9 end superscript with O A T 4; P F O A begin superscript 4 end superscript with U R A T 1; P F O S begin superscript 5 end superscript greater than P F H x S begin superscript 5 end superscript greater than P F N A begin superscript 5 end superscript greater than P F O A begin superscript 5 end superscript greater than P F B S begin superscript 5 end superscript with O A T P and 2 B 1; P F O S begin superscript 3 end superscript with A S B T. From blood, the following things are transported into the proximal tubular cell through the basolateral membrane; P F O A begin superscript 1, 2 end superscript with O A T 1; P F O A begin superscript 1, 2 end superscript with O A T 3; P F B S begin superscript 3 end superscript, P F H x S begin superscript 3 end superscript, P F O S begin superscript 3 end superscript with O S T lowercase alpha or beta. Passive diffusion was present in both urine and blood. Figure 2B is an illustration, depicting a rat proximal tubular cell. From urine, the following things are transported into the proximal tubular cell through the apical membrane: P F N A begin superscript 6 end superscript greater than P F D A begin superscript 6 end superscript greater than P F O A begin superscript 6,7,8 end superscript greater than P F H p A begin superscript 6 end superscript with Oatp1a1. From blood, the following things are transported into the proximal tubular cell through the basolateral membrane: P F H p A begin superscript 6 end superscript greater than P F O A begin superscript 1, 6 end superscript greater than P F N A begin superscript 6 end superscript greater than P F D A begin superscript 6 end superscript with Oat1; P F N A begin superscript 6 end superscript greater than P F O A begin superscript 1, 6, 7 end superscript greater than P F H p A begin superscript 6 end superscript greater than P F D A begin superscript 6 end superscript with Oat3. Passive diffusion was present in both urine and blood. Table 2 Literature sources for studies that directly assessed the uptake of PFAS by renal transporters. Reference number in Figure 2 Reference and year of publication Study type Cell line Investigated transporters Investigated PFAS 1 Nakagawa et al. 2008 38 In vitro HEK293 OAT1/Oat1; OAT2/Oat2; OAT3/Oat3 PFOA 2 Nakagawa et al. 2009 25 In vitro HEK293 OAT4 PFOA 3 Zhao et al. 2015 21 In vitro HEK293; CHO ASBT/Asbt PFBS; PFHxS; PFOS 4 Yang et al. 2010 27 In vitro HEK293; CHO OATP1A2; OAT4; URAT1 PFCAs (C4–C12) 5 Zhao et al. 2017 22 In vitro CHO; HEK293 OATPs/Oatps PFBS; PFHxS; PFOS 6 Weaver et al. 2010 26 In vitro CHO; HEK293 Oat1; Oat2; Oat3; Oatp1a1; Urat1 PFCAs (C2–C18) 7 Katakura et al. 2007 30 In vitro NA Oatp1; Oat3; Npt2; Mrp2 PFOA 8 Yang et al. 2009 31 In vitro CHO Oatp1a1 PFOA 9 Louisse et al. 2023 57 In vitro HEK293 OAT4 PFCAs (C7–C10); PFBS; PFHxS; PFOS Note: See Table 1 for the protein names. ASBT/Asbt, apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter; C, carbon; CHO, Chinese hamster ovarian; HEK293, human embryonic kidney 293; MRP/Mrp, multidrug resistance proteins; NA, not available; NPT/Npt, sodium–phosphate transporters; OAT/Oat, organic anion transporters; OATP/Oatp, organic anion-transporting polypeptides; PFAS, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; PFBS, perfluorobutane sulfonic acid; PFCAs, perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids; PFHxS, perfluorohexane sulfonic acid; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid; PFOS, perfluorooctane sulfonic acid; URAT/Urat, urate transporter. So far, nine human renal uptake transporters have been investigated for their potential importance to PFAS transport ( Figure 2A ). These are: OAT1, 25 , 38 OAT2, 38 OAT3, 25 , 38 OAT4, 25 , 27 URAT1, 27 OATP1A2, 27 OATP2B1, 22 apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT), 21 and OST α / β . 21 The expression of most of these nine transporters (except for OATP2B1) in kidney was indicated by protein expression, whereas, to the best of our knowledge, at the time of this review only mRNA expression in kidney had been demonstrated for OATP2B1, 56 suggesting expression of OATP2B1 protein in kidney needs to be confirmed. OAT2 38 and OATP1A2 27 are the two transporters that did not exhibit significant activity in PFOA transport. To date, five transporters (namely OAT1, OAT3, OAT4, URAT1, and OATP2B1) have been confirmed to transport PFOA. In addition, ASBT and OST α / β reportedly mediated transport of PFOS, and OST α / β also facilitated PFBS and PFHxS transport, but ASBT did not; to the best of our knowledge, the role of ASBT and OST α / β has not been tested in PFOA transport. OATP2B1 and OST α / β have been shown to transport multiple PFAS ( Figure 2A ) and longer-chain PFAS showed higher affinities for both transporters (order of affinity: PFOS &gt; PFHxS &gt; PFBS ). 21 , 22 This trend aligns with observations of longer half-lives for longer-chain PFAS in humans. 52 Among the confirmed PFAS renal uptake transporters, OAT1 and OAT3 reside in the basolateral membrane of the proximal tubular cells and therefore participate in PFAS renal secretion. 20 In contrast, OAT4, URAT1, and OATP2B1 are involved in PFAS renal reabsorption because they are expressed in the apical membrane of proximal tubular cells. 20 To the best of our knowledge, OST α / β , expressed in the basolateral membrane ( Figure 2A ), was the only human renal efflux transporter that was tested and shown to transport PFBS, PFHxS, and PFOS, 21 indicating it was involved in renal reabsorption of these PFAS. Moreover, OST α / β was shown to transport bidirectionally, depending on the concentration gradient of PFAS. 21 In the rat, eight renal uptake transporters have been studied for their potential role in PFAS transport; five of those did not transport PFAS ( Figure 2B ). Specifically, rat renal Oat2 and Urat1 did not demonstrate the capability to transport PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA or PFDA, 26 Npt2 was not involved in PFOA transport, 30 Asbt did not transport PFBS, PFHxS, or PFOS, 21 and multidrug resistance protein 2 (Mrp2) did not facilitate PFOA transport. 30 In contrast, rat renal Oat1 26 , 38 and Oatp1a1 (also referred to as Oatp1) 26 , 30 were considered to facilitate transport for PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA, and PFDA with compound-specific activities, and Oat3 was reported to transport PFOA. 26 , 30 , 38 The affinities of PFAS with renal transporters showed transporter-specific patterns. For example, PFHpA and PFOA had the highest affinities for rat Oat1 and Oat3, but the transport efficiencies of PFHpA, PFOA, and PFNA by both Oat1 and Oat 3 were similar. 26 In contrast, PFNA and PFDA had higher affinities and efficiencies for Oatp1a1 compared with PFOA. 26 This trend also aligned with observations of longer half-lives for longer-chain PFAS in rats. In addition, rat renal uptake transporters Oat1 and Oat3 are expressed at the basolateral membrane, indicating that they positively contribute to PFAS renal secretion, whereas Oatp1a1 resides in the apical membrane, suggesting it is involved in PFAS renal reabsorption. 20 To the best of our knowledge, Mrp2 is the only renal efflux transporter in rats that has been investigated for PFAS uptake, and a single previous study showed that Mrp2 did not play a role in PFOA renal elimination. 30 To date, one zebrafish renal transporter, Oatp1d1 (considered functionally similar to mammalian OATP1A/Oatp1a and OAT1B/Oatp1b), was investigated for its potential for PFAS transport mediation and showed the ability to mediate transport of PFOS but not PFOA. 59 OAT4 is a human-specific transporter 60 that was previously demonstrated to transport PFOA 25 , 27 ; thus, it may be one of the transporters responsible for species-specific differences in PFAS toxicokinetics. Human renal ASBT is another recently identified transporter that was considered responsible for species-specific differences in PFAS toxicokinetics based on findings by Zhao et al. 21 that human ASBT transported PFOS, whereas rat Asbt did not. Although the expression of human renal OAT2 and rat renal Oat2 are at the opposite sides of the proximal tubular cell, these transporters have not been identified as related to species-specific differences in PFAS toxicokinetics given that they have not demonstrated the ability to facilitate PFAS secretion/reabsorption. Human and rat OAT1/Oat1 and OAT3/Oat3 are considered to play a limited role in species-specific differences given that they have shown comparable uptake ability for PFAS in laboratory studies. 26 However, inferential human population evidence has suggested that OAT1 and OAT3 may operate differently in humans compared with rats. Inhibition of transporters (e.g., Oat1, Oat3) by probenecid had a marked and sex-differential effect on PFOA elimination in rats. 61 In contrast, probenecid had no discernible effect on PFOA or PFOS excretion in a human population. 62 The authors concluded that OAT1 and OAT3 were “lazy” PFAS excreters (having lower capability for PFAS excretion) in humans compared with rats. 62 However, another possible reason causing the difference in probenecid effects on rats and humans could be the species-specific mechanisms of reabsorption of PFOA. Probenecid is a known inhibitor of not only OATs/Oats, 63 but also OATPs/Oatps, 63 MRPs/MRPs, 63 and URAT1/Urat1. 64 OAT4 and URAT1 are responsible for PFOA reabsorption in humans, but rats do not have an Oat4 and rat Urat1 does not transport PFOA 27 ( Figure 2 ). This suggests the reabsorption of PFOA could be inhibited by probenecid in humans but not in the rat and that URAT1 could also be responsible for species differences in PFOA elimination. Although sex differences in PFHxS and PFOS (but not PFOA) elimination were observed in humans, 56 to the best of our knowledge, no human renal transporters to date have been specifically identified as responsible. Sex differences in PFAS half-lives could be partially or mostly attributed to nonrenal causes, including menstruation, breast-feeding, and transplacental transport of PFAS from mother to fetus in humans. 65 , 66 Currently known PFAS renal transporters are also distributed in other tissues. For example, the human uptake transporter OAT4 is also expressed in the placenta, 67 indicating this transporter could play an important role in PFAS transfer from mother to fetus. OAT1 and OAT3 are also expressed in the brain, endocrine tissues, and gastrointestinal tract 56 ( https://www.proteinatlas.org ; Table 1 ), indicating they may play multiple roles in PFAS distribution in the human body. OATPs are expressed in the brain, liver, lungs, kidney, testes, and intestines. 68 OATP2B1 is present in a variety of tissues, especially gut and liver, and including proximal tubules and basolateral epithelial cells of the kidney. 69 In vitro evidence from the human colon cancer–derived Caco-2 cell line has suggested that OATP2B1 could be a contributor to the long human half-lives of several PFAS. 70 OST α / β , the efflux transporter studied among the human renal transporters, also resides in the liver, gallbladder, and ileum, suggesting it may play a significant role in PFAS elimination through enterohepatic circulation. In addition, Oatp1d1 is also expressed in zebrafish liver, brain, intestine, gill, ovary, and muscle tissues. 55 Overall, more information is available on tissue distribution of human transporters compared with rat and zebrafish, complicating comparisons of species differences. Other Renal Transporters with the Potential for PFAS Transport The currently known PFAS renal transporters are members of two transporter families: the SLC and ABC superfamilies. 20 The SLC superfamily is the second largest family of membrane proteins after G protein–coupled receptors. 39 SLC transporters do not rely on ATP hydrolysis and are largely, but not exclusively, uptake transporters; that is, they generally facilitate cellular uptake of molecules (e.g., endogenous metabolites, drugs, toxicants). 68 , 71 – 73 ABC transporters are ubiquitous membrane proteins that use ATP hydrolysis and mostly function as efflux transporters. 74 , 75 A total of 48 families in the SLC superfamily and 5 families in the ABC superfamily have been identified based on sequence similarities; details about the families and transporters can be found in the Guide to PHARMACOLOGY database. 39 Notably, many transporters have overlaps in terms of their substrates; this happens among transporters in the same superfamily and also among those across the SLC and ABC superfamilies. 74 Kidney transporters with substrates that have similar molecular structures as PFAS or that have expression levels that were shown to positively correlate with PFAS concentrations were considered to have the potential for PFAS transport for this review. Fatty acids, which are endogenous substrates of FABPs, have similar structures as PFAS, especially perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids. 76 A significant positive association was identified in humans between plasma PFOA and PFOS concentrations and bile acid levels. 12 In addition, phospholipid levels were significantly associated with long-chain PFAS concentrations in North Atlantic pilot whale tissues. 77 Based on our literature analysis, we proposed seven human renal transporters that may have the potential for PFAS transport ( Table 3 ), suggesting these should be prioritized for further experimental evaluation. Specifically, OATP4A1, an uptake transporter at the basolateral membrane, was considered because of its ability to transport bile acids. MRP1, an efflux transporter at the basolateral membrane and MDR1/P-glycoprotein (MDR1/P-gp), an efflux transporter at the apical membrane, were also included because of their ability to transport phospholipids. Another efflux transporter at the apical membrane, breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP, also known as ABCP), was proposed because it has been shown to transport PFOA across the blood–testis barrier. 84 Three additional ABC transporters, namely, adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP), ALD-related gene (ALDR), and peroxisomal membrane protein (PMP70) were included because they have been shown to transport very-long-chain fatty acids, monounsaturated very-long-chain fatty acids, branched-chain fatty acids and bile acids. 39 Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, information on the localization and mechanisms (uptake or efflux) is not currently available for these three transporters. Table 3 Candidate list of human renal transporters that have not been tested but may have potential for PFAS transport. Gene name Protein name Function Reference for transporter localization and function Other tissue distribution Evidence for the potential to transport PFAS Reference for the evidence Basolateral membrane (blood side) SLCO4A1 OATP4A1 Uptake 78 Broad distribution (eye) Bile acid transporter Database a ABCC1 MRP1 Efflux 79 , 80 Broad distribution (eye, proximal digestive tract, and muscle) Phospholipid transporter Apical membrane (urine side) ABCB1 MDR1/P-gp Efflux 81 , 82 Broad distribution (eye, lung, proximal digestive tract, pancreas, testis, muscle, adipose, skin, and bone) Phospholipid transporter Database ABCG2 ABCP/BCRP Efflux 83 Broad distribution (eye, proximal digestive tract, liver, skin, adipose, and pancreas) Transporting PFOA when expressing in blood–testis barrier 84 Unknown localization ABCD1 ALDP Unknown — Broad distribution (eye) Transporting long-chain fatty acid Database ABCD2 ALDR Unknown — Broad distribution with only mRNA expression according to the database ABCD3 PMP70 Unknown — Broad distribution (eye) Transporting long-chain fatty acid and bile acid Note: Source for tissue distribution: https://www.proteinatlas.org . See Table 1 for other protein names. —, No information available; ABC, adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette gene family; ABCP/BCRP, breast cancer resistance protein; ASBT/Asbt, apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter; ALDP, adrenoleukodystrophy protein; ALDR, ALD-related gene; MDR/MRP, multidrug resistance protein; OATP/Oatp, organic anion-transporting polypeptides; PFAS, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid; P-gp, P-glycoprotein; PMP, peroxisomal membrane protein; SLC, solute carrier gene family. a Website-based Guide to PHARMACOLOGY database 39 ( https://www.guidetopharmacology.org ). Levels and Patterns of Renal Transporter Expression in Kidney Disease We identified 2,773 papers from the search for transporter expression-level changes in kidney disease (Excel Table S2). After exclusion of 2,749 papers, a total of 24 studies that quantified the changes of renal transporter expression during kidney disease were identified. Among these 24 publications, 12 studies used animal models to investigate renal transporter-level changes during AKI, 8 studies used animal models to investigate renal transporter changes during CKD, 3 used animal models to investigate renal transporter changes during diabetic nephropathy, and 1 assessed renal transporter changes in clinical patients with renal diseases (Excel Table S2). Given the important role of relevant renal transporters in PFAS elimination, changes in expression levels and patterns of these transporters with kidney disease could substantially influence PFAS biological half-lives for specific populations. Kidney diseases can be acute or chronic, and both types can cause changes in transporter expressions and GFR. AKI is defined as acute renal dysfunction with mild-to-severe changes in renal function. 85 , 86 Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is defined as GFR &lt; 60 mL / min per 1.73 m 2 of functioning nephrons or markers of kidney damage (e.g., nephrotic syndrome, urinary tract symptoms), or both, of at least 3-months duration. 87 CKD is classified into five stages based on GFR. Stages 1 and 2 are defined as normal and mild kidney damage, respectively, stages 3 to 4 are defined as moderate and severe kidney damage, and stage 5 (GFR &lt; 15 mL / min per 1.73 m 2 ) is defined as kidney failure, also referred to as end-stage renal disease. 88 Although the causes of CKD vary globally, diabetes and hypertension are the main causes of CKD in all high- and middle-income counties, as well as in many low-income countries, whereas glomerulonephritis is another important cause of CKD, especially in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. 87 Environmental exposures to metals and organic compounds have also been implicated in CKD epidemics, 87 , 89 , 90 and epidemiologic relationships have been identified between toxic metals, such as lead, and organic compounds, such as PFAS, with CKD. 9 , 91 In addition, albuminuria is an indicator of CKD and could also be a pathway of PFAS excretion given that many PFAS have been shown to bind to serum albumin. 15 – 17 The impact of albuminuria on PFAS toxicokinetics is discussed in the subsequent PBPK modeling section. Previous studies have demonstrated that renal transporter expression levels were altered by the presence of kidney disease, with transporter- and disease-specific outcomes in rats, 45 , 92 – 97 and humans. 98 , 99 On the other hand, changes in renal transporter expression levels and function could also lead to kidney disease progression. 100 – 103 The changes that may occur in renal transporters because of different kidney disease pathologies or over the development of disease are not fully understood owing to the complexity of kidney diseases and the fact that they often occur alongside other comorbidities, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, and cardiovascular disease. 104 – 107 Nevertheless, we summarized the current knowledge on changes in the expression levels of renal transporters that have the ability or the potential for PFAS transport according to reported specified kidney diseases. Most of the available information was derived from animal models and in vitro approaches. Human evidence ( Figure 3A ) included significantly lower BCRP expression levels in patients with glomerulonephritis secondary to small vessel vasculitis (SVV) and in P-gp expression levels in patients with glomerulonephritis secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 108 Nonsignificant differences were observed for other transporters (i.e., OATP1A2 and MRP2) in different patient groups (i.e., SVV, SVV-control, SLE, and SLE-control, Figure 3A ). 108 An ex vivo study found that expression levels of P-gp in Sprague-Dawley female rats were ∼ 260 % and ∼ 160 % higher compared with levels in control rats 4 wk after uninephrectomy and 2 wk after uninephrectomy and diabetes, respectively ( Figure 3B ). 42 Six research articles were selected for reporting the time-dependent expression-level differences in renal transporter expression in rats with experimental drug (e.g., lycopene, cisplatin)–induced AKI or ischemia/reperfusion–induced AKI. 40 , 43 , 109 – 112 After compiling the data for each transporter from different articles (articles 1–11 in Table 4 ), we found a U-shaped distribution for Oat1 and Oat3 expression levels as a function of time, with either lower expression or no difference in expression compared with the levels of controls ( Figure 3C ). Oatp1a1 expression levels were 20% of control levels in 96 h after cisplatin-induced AKI ( Figure 3C ), 114 whereas Mrp2 expression levels were 220% and 280% of control levels in 96 h 114 and 240 h, 109 respectively, after cisplatin-induced AKI ( Figure 3D ). Expression levels of Mrp1 and P-gp also were higher—180% and 600% of control levels in 96 h after cisplatin-induced AKI. 114 More renal transporters were investigated in experimental CKD than AKI using rat models. Similar to the distribution in AKI, Oat1 and Oat3 expression levels in rats showed a U-shaped pattern with time after 5/6 nephrectomy ( Figure 4A ) based on data compiled from literature (articles 12–19 in Table 4 ). 41 , 44 , 45 , 117 In addition, expression levels of all targeted SLC transporters (i.e., Oat2, Urat1, Oatp1A1, Asbt, Ost α / β , Npt1, and Npt4) and Bcrp (ABC transporter) were lower in rats with CKD, whereas expression levels of Mrp2 (ABC transporter) were higher and diminished with time after 5/6 nephrectomy ( Figure 4A,B ). 94 , 118 – 120 Figure 3. Renal transporter expression levels (percentage of control) in (A) human clinical glomerulonephritis, (B) experimental diabetic nephropathy in rats, and (C,D) experimental acute kidney injury in rats summarized from previous studies. In (A,B), the light blue shading below the horizontal line at 100 indicates value &lt;100% and light purple shading above the horizontal line at 100 indicates value &gt;100% . All data used to construct the figures were extracted from the literature (see Table 4 and Excel Table S4 for references). Numbers in the figure are ordered according to Table 4 references. The numbers of people or animals included in the reviewed studies are provided in Table 4 . Note: BCRP, breast cancer resistance protein; MRP/Mrp, multidrug resistance proteins; OAT/Oat, organic anion transporters; OATP/Oatp, organic anion-transporting polypeptides; P-gp, P-glycoprotein; SLE, glomerulonephritis secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus; SLE-C, SLE-control; SVV, glomerulonephritis secondary to small vessel vasculitis; SVV-C, SVV-control. Figure 3A is a clustered bar graph titled Clinical glomerulonephritis, plotting protein level percentage of control, ranging from 0 to 210 in increments of 30 (y-axis) across O A T P 1 A 2, M R P 2, B C R P, and P-glycoprotein (x-axis) for S V V, S V V-C, S L E, and S L E-C. Figure 3B is a clustered bar graph titled Experimental diabetic nephropathy, plotting protein level percentage of control, ranging from 0 to 300 in increments of 50 (y-axis) across P-glycoprotein (x-axis) for uninephrectomy and uninephrectomy plus diabetes. Figure 3C is a graph titled Experimental acute kidney injury, plotting protein or messenger ribonucleic acid percentage of control, ranging from 20 to 100 in increments of 20 (y-axis) across time (hours), ranging from 0 to 96 in increments of 12, 96 to 192 in increments of 96, 192 to 240 in increments of 24 (x-axis) for Oat 1, Oat 2, and Oatp1a1. Figure 3D is a graph titled Experimental acute kidney injury, plotting protein or messenger ribonucleic acid percentage of control, ranging from 100 to 600 in increments of 100 (y-axis) across time (hours), ranging from 72 to 240 in increments of 24 (x-axis) for Mrp1, Mrp2, and P-glycoprotein. Table 4 Literature sources for expression-level changes in putative PFAS renal transporters in various kidney disease conditions. Reference number in Figures 3 and 4 Reference Investigated transporters (PFAS-related) Disease type People ( n ) or animals ( N ) 1 108 P-gp; BCRP; MRP2; OATP1A2 Clinical glomerulonephritis SVV: n = 35 ; SLE: n = 36 2 42 P-gp Experimental diabetic nephropathy with rat N = 10 Ex vivo Experimental AKI 3 40 Oat1; Oat3 AKI with male rat N = 4 4 111 Oat1; Oat3 AKI with male rat N = 3 5 112 Oat1; Oat3 AKI with male rat N = 8 6 43 Oat1; Oat3 AKI with female rat N = 3 – 24 7 109 Oat1; Oat3; Mrp2 AKI with rat N = 7 8 110 Oat1 AKI with rat N = 2 – 5 9 113 Oat1; Oat3 AKI with rat N = 3 – 5 10 114 Oat1; Oat3; Oatp1a1; Mrp1; Mrp2; P-gp AKI with rat N = 6 11 115 Oat1; Oat3 AKI with rat N = 4 12 116 Oat1; Oat3; Mrp2 AKI with rat N = 3 Ex vivo Experimental CKD 13 44 Oat1; Oat3 CKD with male rat N = 6 – 7 14 117 Oat1; Oat3 CKD with male rat N = 7 – 10 15 45 Oat1; Oat2; Oat3; Urat1; Oatp1a1 CKD with male rat N = 12 16 41 Oat1; Oat3 CKD with male rat N = 4 17 118 Urat1; Bcrp CKD with male rat N = 3 – 7 18 119 Oatp1a1; Asbt; Ost α / β CKD with male rat N = 8 19 120 Bcrp; Mrp1; Mrp2 CKD with male and female rat N = 6 – 7 20 94 Mrp2; P-gp CKD with male rat N = 8 Note: AKI, acute kidney injury; ASBT/Asbt, apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter; BCRP/bcrp, breast cancer resistance protein; CKD, chronic kidney disease; MRP/Mrp, multidrug resistance proteins; OAT/Oat, organic anion transporters; OATP/Oatp, organic anion-transporting polypeptides; OST, organic solute transporter; PFAS, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; P-gp, P-glycoprotein; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; SVV, small vessel vasculitis; URAT/Urat, urate transporter. Figure 4. Expression levels of (A) current known renal transporters for PFAS transport and (B) candidate renal transporters for PFAS transport as a percentage of control in experimental chronic kidney failure in rats, summarized from reviewed studies. Light blue shading below the horizontal line at 100 indicates value &lt;100% and light purple shading above the horizontal line at 100 indicates value &gt;100% . All data used to construct the figures were extracted from ex vivo studies from the literature (see Table 4 and Excel Table S4 for references). Numbers in the figure are ordered according to Table 4 references. Numbers of animals in the reviewed studies are provided in Table 4 . Note: ASBT/Asbt, apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter; BCRP/Bcrp, breast cancer resistance protein; MRP/Mrp, multidrug resistance proteins; OAT/Oat, organic anion transporters; OST, organic solute transporter; P-gp, P-glycoprotein; PFAS, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; URAT/Urat, urate transporter. Figure 4A is a line graph titled Known transporters for P F A S transport, plotting protein or messenger ribonucleic acid percentage of control, ranging from 0 to 100 in increments of 20 (y-axis) across time (weeks), ranging from 0 to 25 in increments of 5 (x-axis) for Oat 1, Oat 2, Oat 3, Urat 1, Oatp1a1, Asbt, and Ost lowercase alpha or beta. Figure 4B is a graph titles Candidate transporters for P F A S transport, ranging from 40 to 240 in increments of 40 (y-axis) across time (weeks), ranging from 3 to 9 in unit increments (x-axis) for Bcrp, Mrp2, Mrp1, and P-glycoprotein. PBPK Modeling in Populations with Kidney Disease We identified 258 papers from the search for PFAS-related PBPK models. After exclusion of 221 papers that did not develop PBPK models for PFAS, 37 studies that reported on PFAS-specific PBPK models were included in this review (Excel Table S3). Among these 37 studies, 9 did not consider renal reabsorption in their PBPK models, 121 – 129 and 24 of them considered renal reabsorption using a transporter maximum ( T m , representing transporter saturation) and an affinity constant ( k t , representing transporter uptake), but none of them were transporter-specific. 130 – 153 Four publications included transporter-specific pathways, with 2 for PFAS in fish, 154 , 155 and 2 for PFAS in male rats. 13 , 156 PBPK models are useful tools to simulate the processes of absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) of chemicals in different organs and tissues in animals and humans. 157 In addition, PBPK models provide a link between external exposure and internal toxicokinetics and can be used in two different frameworks. First, these models can help characterize the relationship between exposure dose and the effects on the chemical concentrations in the target organs. 158 Second, PBPK models can predict the external exposure using human biomonitoring data, such as chemical levels in blood or urine. 159 This inverse prediction can also be used in estimating the reference dose in support of risk assessment. 160 Previous studies have revealed that PFOA strongly binds to serum albumin, resulting in a long half-life in human blood 161 and that active renal reabsorption contributes to sex- and species-specific differences in PFAS half-lives. 20 The permeability-limited PFOA-PBPK model for male rat developed by Cheng and Ng included four kidney transporters (i.e., Oat 1, Oat 3, Oatp1a1, and Ost α / β ). 13 Although three of the four transporters (but not Ost α / β ) showed significant changes in expression levels during experimentally simulated kidney diseases in previous studies, 103 only Oat1 and Oat3 had significant changes at the same time points ( Figures 3 and 4 ). In addition, the Cheng and Ng model 13 included glomerular filtration as a pathway for PFAS excretion using a parameter for GFR, which might change significantly during the development of kidney disease. In this section, we describe using the Cheng and Ng model to simulate changes in transporter expression levels (by setting the clearance rate constant of Oat1 and Oat3 to 20% of the model default), in GFR (by setting GFR to 33% 43 and 5% 43 of the model default), and in albumin concentrations (by setting albumin concentration to 70% of the model default) to explore how such changes during kidney disease could affect PFOA toxicokinetics in the male rat. For transporter levels, the changes of Oat1 and Oat3 expression at 6 wk in Figure 4A were used to represent the worst-case scenario. Serum PFOA toxicokinetics modeled using the modified Cheng and Ng PBPK model ( Figure 5 ) showed biphasic patterns with fast initial clearance, during which the serum half-life (also called the apparent half-life) was short, and slow terminal clearance during which the half-life (also called the terminal half-life, t 1 / 2 ∞ ) was long. The t 1 / 2 ∞ reflected the rate and extent of elimination after the chemical or drug was accumulated, distributed, and reached pseudo-equilibrium. The serum PFOA t 1 / 2 ∞ was longer in rats with decreased levels of Oat 1 and Oat 3 and GFR compared with healthy rats ( Figure 5A,B ) with normal levels. In addition, both the decrease of transporter expression levels (i.e., Oat1 and Oat3) and GFR resulted in higher PFOA concentrations in plasma than those in healthy rats. PFOA toxicokinetics were more influenced by changes in GFR than in transporter expression levels, whereas serum PFOA t 1 / 2 ∞ was more influenced by changes in transporter expression levels than GFR ( Figure 5A,B ). However, it is noteworthy that the modeled PFOA toxicokinetics ignored the influence of reabsorption transporter (Oatp1a1) changes in disease owing to a lack of data for this polypeptide (at the same time points as Oat1 and Oat3). Serum PFOA t 1 / 2 ∞ were comparable between rats with 70% decreased albumin concentrations and healthy rats; however, the half-life at the initial phase was shorter in rats with decreased serum albumin concentration ( Figure 5C ), indicating a faster PFOA elimination due to the decrease of albumin. Lower serum PFAS measured in humans with albuminuria provides inferential evidence that this elimination difference also pertains to humans. 162 It should be noted that the model results were based on a single simulated exposure; in the real world, humans have continuous exposures, primarily by ingestion and inhalation, as well as complex patterns of excretion in progressive stages of kidney disease. This means, in the real world, the human body burden of PFAS may be elevated compared with the simulated scenario, particularly in populations with specific kidney diseases, although human populations with any albuminuria could have lower PFAS concentrations in serum than those with normal or mildly impaired renal function. Figure 5. Simulations of PFOA toxicokinetics using the Cheng and Ng model 13 for male rats. (A) Effect of decreased expression levels of Oat1 and Oat3 (the clearance rate constants for Oat1 and Oat3 were set to 20% of the original model default value, and the transporter expression changes were obtained from Figure 4A ) on PFOA half-life. (B) Effect of decreased GFR (by setting GFR to 33% 43 and 5% 43 of the model default) on serum PFOA half-life. (C) Effect of decreased albumin concentration mimicking albuminuria (by setting albumin concentration to 70% of the model default) on PFOA half-life. All data used to construct the figures are provided in Excel Table S5. Note: GFR, glomerular filtration rate; OAT/Oat, organic anion transporters; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid. Figures 5A, 5B, and 5C are line graphs titled Transporter expression, Glomerular filtration rates, and Albuminuria, plotting P F O A concentration in plasma (nanograms per gram), ranging as 10 begin superscript 3 end superscript and 10 begin superscript 4 end superscript (y-axis) across Time (min), ranging from 0 to 240 in increments of 60 (x-axis) for Figure 5A: healthy male rat, 20% clearance; for Figure 5B: healthy male rat, 5% and 33% glomerular filtration rates; and for Figure 5C: healthy male rat, 70% albumin, respectively. Discussion Research Gaps and Promising Directions for PFAS Interactions with Renal Transporters As knowledge around PFAS renal elimination has progressed to the molecular and cellular levels, a number of human and rat renal transporters located at the basolateral and apical membranes of proximal tubular cells have been investigated for their interactions and affinities with PFAS molecules. 22 , 26 , 27 Several human and rat renal transporters, such as OATs/Oats, 38 OST α / β , 21 and ASBT 21 have been shown to facilitate PFAS transport with medium-to-high affinities, and these affinities were also related to PFAS structures. To date, more renal uptake transporters (e.g., most SLC transporters) than efflux transporters (e.g., ABC transporters) have been studied in human and rat systems ( Figure 2 ), based on interest in the renal reabsorption pathway extending PFAS half-lives. As a result, knowledge on the interactions between renal efflux transporters and PFAS remains incomplete. Some branched isomers of PFAS (e.g., of PFOS and PFOA) have been shown to have longer or much shorter half-lives than corresponding linear isomers in humans 163 ; however, to the best of our knowledge, no related studies have been done in terms of renal transporters. In addition, the huge PFAS family includes not only the anionic PFAAs that are the ones studied until now, but also polyfluorinated substances and PFAS that are cationic or zwitterionic at environmental pH values. 164 Renal organic cation transporters (OCTs, from the SLC 22 gene family) and multidrug and toxicant extrusion proteins (MATEs, from the SLC 47 gene family) could be involved in cationic and zwitterionic PFAS transport. Selection of an appropriate experimental model is an important consideration for studies of PFAS toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics and to understand the relevance for human and wildlife risk assessments. For example, in zebrafish, PFOA renal elimination is probably mediated by transporters other than Oatp1d1. 67 Although the endocrine system has been reported to be very similar in teleost fish and mammals, the role of the Oatp1 transporter in transporting PFAS differed substantially between zebrafish and mammals, and the substrate-binding sites of Oatp1d1 and mammalian OATP1 differed to some extent. 67 Therefore, zebrafish cannot be directly used as a model to study mammalian OAT/Oat transport systems with respect to PFAS transport and disposition. 67 Only a handful of PFAS, most notably PFOA, have been studied in terms of their interactions with renal transporters. Studies of more PFAS, especially the current-use PFAS (including shorter-chain PFAS and replacements, such as GenX) are also needed for better coverage of the role of transporters across the structurally diverse PFAS family. This review has focused on direct PFAS transport by kidney transporters. Although we did not include the topic of transporter inhibition by PFAS, PFOA has been shown to induce Bcrp expression in mice and may inhibit the human BCRP transporter function at concentrations that exceed levels observed in humans. 165 In addition, nanomolar levels of GenX inhibited P-gp and Bcrp but not Mrp2 transporter activities in male and female rats, and GenX reduced P-gp and BCRP transporter activity in human cells. 166 Inhibition of transporter activity by a specific PFAS does not necessarily mean that the transporter can transport that specific PFAS. However, the inhibition of a transporter could influence its ability to transport other substrates (e.g., endogenous ligands or other PFAS). Adding to the complexity, different PFAS may compete with each other for binding to transporters. 167 Therefore, future work should also consider the inhibitory effect of PFAS on transporters and competitive binding, which are important considerations in the context of PFAS mixtures. More Work Needed regarding Renal Transporters in Health and Disease We have proposed a candidate list of renal transporters that have the potential for PFAS transport as a result of this review ( Table 3 ). This list will lengthen as the knowledge of PFAS-biomarker relationships, as well as information on the endogenous substrates of proteins, progresses. Animal experimental work addresses one aspect of the role of expression-level changes in renal transporters altered by kidney disease state. Overall, expression levels of SLC transporters (e.g., Oat1, Oat3, Oatp1a1), which are mainly uptake transporters, initially decreased and sometimes fully or partially returned to normal as the recovery progressed in surgically induced AKI and CKD, whereas expression levels of ABC transporters (e.g., Mrp 1, Bcrp, P-gp), which are mainly efflux transporters, had specific outcomes. For example, expression levels of BCRP and P-gp in humans with clinical glomerulonephritis was ∼ 70 % and ∼ 40 % lower, respectively, 108 whereas levels of P-gp in experimental rats with diabetic nephropathy was 50% higher. 42 Currently, clinical evidence for transporter changes in kidney diseases is scarce. PFAS-transporter roles and changes as a function of disease or developmental stages, as well as interaction with and modifications by other toxicants and medications, are poorly understood. In addition, specific changes in GFR, along with transporter expression changing during kidney disease, are also important for predicting PFAS toxicokinetics. Menstrual blood loss, breast-feeding, and childbirth are sex-specific excretion routes for PFAS 65 , 168 that could contribute to sex differences, but sex differences in the changes in expression levels of renal transporters may also play a role. These major research gaps are critical to understanding the interindividual variabilities in PFAS toxicokinetics and identifying particularly sensitive populations. More Work Needed to Advance PBPK Models PFOA toxicokinetics have been studied in patients with advanced cancer by Convertino et al., and they posited that the previously published half-lives of PFOA in healthy humans (i.e., 2–3 y 52 ) were significantly longer than actual half-lives. 52 However, a limitation of that study was that they did not consider the influence of disease on PFOA elimination by the human body. This could be important because the renal transporter protein levels and GFR could be significantly altered in humans with kidney disease, 169 which will further strongly influence PFAS elimination from the human body. In addition, the fundamental limitation reported in the conclusions by Convertino et al. 124 concerning the PFOA half-life was the use of acute chemotherapeutic PFOA doses, which are orders of magnitude greater than chronic environmental exposures. To the degree that Convertino et al. 124 half-life data in terminally ill cancer patients can be interpreted, the apparently shorter half-lives most likely reflect a limit of reabsorption kinetics and binding capacity that operates at some point in the large exposure difference between the highest chronic environmental and the acute chemotherapeutic doses. More accurate, quantitative, and comprehensive characterization of renal tubular secretion and reabsorption pathways in both health and disease is required to further advance PFAS-PBPK models, especially for understanding the impacts of kidney disease on PFAS toxicokinetics. Appropriate exposure doses are also critical to toxicokinetic studies. Fenton et al. 170 showed that GFR had sex- and age-dependent patterns, with significantly higher GFR in human males than females (92.0 vs. 88.1 mL / min per 1.73 m 2 ), in a healthy population from 20 to 80 years of age. In addition, GFR was ∼ 100 mL / min per 1.73 m 2 until 35 years of age, followed by linear decreases along age increases, with a faster decline in females compared with males, and the major proportion of the healthy population &gt; 60 years of age had a GFR &lt; 60 mL / min per 1.73 m 2 . 170 Variability in GFR in healthy populations could result in variability in PFAS toxicokinetics. According to Figure 5B , using a lower GFR in the model resulted in slower PFAS elimination (i.e., longer half-lives) and higher plasma PFAS concentrations in male rats compared with healthy male rats. Similarly, in humans, senior groups could have slower PFAS elimination (i.e., longer half-lives) and higher PFAS concentrations accumulated in blood compared with people &lt; 35 years of age. In addition, males have slightly faster PFAS elimination than females via the glomerular filtration pathway; however, transporter-facilitated pathways also contribute to sex differences in PFAS renal elimination. 20 There is limited information on the variability in transporter expression levels in humans. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, there are no transporter-specific PFAS-PBPK models for humans so far. In this review, we used an existing PFOA-PBPK model for male rats to investigate the influence of changes in transporter levels, GFR, and serum albumin on PFOA toxicokinetics. However, translating these conclusions across species can be difficult owing to species differences. Therefore, more work is needed to understand the impacts of variability in transporter expression changes on the variability in PFAS toxicokinetics in humans. Conclusion Research on PFAS transport by renal transporters is increasing, yet the diversity of investigated PFAS and transporter types remains limited. Evidence supports that renal reabsorption is responsible for some sex- and species-specific differences in PFAS half-lives. Therefore, renal transporters that facilitate reabsorption have received more attention compared with those that facilitate excretion. Further studies are needed to explore additional renal transporters to fully understand the renal elimination mechanisms and to include more PFAS compounds, particularly the current-use PFAS, such as shorter-chain PFAS, to advance knowledge of their renal transport processes. In this review, we have identified seven potential PFAS transporters that should be prioritized for experimental evaluation. Kidney disease status can alter renal transporter expression levels and, therefore, influence the renal PFAS elimination; however, very limited work has been conducted investigating how various kidney diseases impact PFAS toxicokinetics. Moreover, research gaps exist in understanding the expression changes of renal transporters as a function of developmental stages at different life stages. PBPK models are useful tools for simulating PFAS toxicokinetics; however, they require PFAS-specific data and complex parameters describing ADME mechanisms. Unfortunately, most of the data and parameters specific to PFAS are not currently available. Alternatively, in silico and in vitro methods could aid in PBPK parameterization. Progress on more mechanisms of toxicokinetics for the broad PFAS class in kidney health and disease status is critically needed to comprehensively assess human health risk and identify vulnerable populations. Supplementary Material Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgments We thank J.K. Gregory for helping with Figure 2. This work was supported by a Pitt Momentum Funds Seeding grant to C.N. from the University of Pittsburgh. References 1. Borthakur A , Wang M , He M , Ascencio K , Blotevogel J , Adamson DT , et al. 2021 . Perfluoroalkyl acids on suspended particles: significant transport pathways in surface runoff, surface waters, and subsurface soils . J Hazard Mater 417 : 126159 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126159 . 34229412 2. Zhang D , Li X , Wang M , Xie W . 2021 . Occurrence and distribution of poly-and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in a surface flow constructed wetland . Ecol Eng 169 : 106291 , 10.1016/j.ecoleng.2021.106291 . 3. Espindola Santos AS , Meyer A , Dabkiewicz VE , Câmara VM , Asmus CIRF . 2021 . Serum levels of perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid in pregnant women: maternal predictors and associations with birth outcomes in the PIPA Project . J Obstet Gynaecol Res 47 ( 9 ): 3107 – 3118 , PMID: , 10.1111/jog.14883 . 34111903 4. Seshasayee SM , Rifas-Shiman SL , Chavarro JE , Carwile JL , Lin PID , Calafat AM , et al. 2021 . Dietary patterns and PFAS plasma concentrations in childhood: Project Viva, USA . Environ Int 151 : 106415 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2021.106415 . 33706127 PMC7979513 5. Taniyasu S , Kannan K , Horii Y , Hanari N , Yamashita N . 2003 . A survey of perfluorooctane sulfonate and related perfluorinated organic compounds in water, fish, birds, and humans from Japan . Environ Sci Technol 37 ( 12 ): 2634 – 2639 , PMID: , 10.1021/es0303440 . 12854699 6. Guillette TC , McCord J , Guillette M , Polera ME , Rachels KT , Morgeson C , et al. 2020 . Elevated levels of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in Cape Fear River striped bass ( Morone saxatilis ) are associated with biomarkers of altered immune and liver function . Environ Int 136 : 105358 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2019.105358 . 32044175 PMC7064817 7. Costello E , Rock S , Stratakis N , Eckel SP , Walker DI , Valvi D , et al. 2022 . Exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and markers of liver injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Environ Health Perspect 130 ( 4 ): 46001 , PMID: , 10.1289/EHP10092 . 35475652 PMC9044977 8. Ducatman A , Fenton SE . 2022 . Invited perspective: PFAS and liver disease: bringing all the evidence together . Environ Health Perspect 130 ( 4 ): 41303 , PMID: , 10.1289/EHP11149 . 35475651 PMC9044975 9. Zhao J , Hinton P , Chen J , Jiang J . 2020 . Causal inference for the effect of environmental chemicals on chronic kidney disease . Comput Struct Biotechnol J 18 : 93 – 99 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.csbj.2019.12.001 . 31934310 PMC6951480 10. Blake BE , Cope HA , Hall SM , Keys RD , Mahler BW , McCord J , et al. 2020 . Evaluation of maternal, embryo, and placental effects in CD-1 mice following gestational exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) or hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer acid (HFPO-DA or GenX) . Environ Health Perspect 128 ( 2 ): 027006 , PMID: , 10.1289/EHP6233 . 32074459 PMC7064328 11. Cao H , Zhou Z , Hu Z , Wei C , Li J , Wang L , et al. 2022 . Effect of enterohepatic circulation on the accumulation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances: evidence from experimental and computational studies . Environ Sci Technol 56 ( 5 ): 3214 – 3224 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.1c07176 . 35138827 12. Salihović S , Dickens AM , Schoultz I , Fart F , Sinisalu L , Lindeman T , et al. 2020 . Simultaneous determination of perfluoroalkyl substances and bile acids in human serum using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry . Anal Bioanal Chem 412 ( 10 ): 2251 – 2259 , PMID: , 10.1007/s00216-019-02263-6 . 31760452 PMC7118038 13. Cheng W , Ng CA . 2017 . A permeability-limited physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in male rats . Environ Sci Technol 51 ( 17 ): 9930 – 9939 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.7b02602 . 28759222 14. Cui L , Liao CY , Zhou QF , Xia TM , Yun ZJ , Jiang GB . 2010 . Excretion of PFOA and PFOS in male rats during a subchronic exposure . Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 58 ( 1 ): 205 – 213 , PMID: , 10.1007/s00244-009-9336-5 . 19468665 15. Houde M , Martin JW , Letcher RJ , Solomon KR , Muir DCG . 2006 . Biological monitoring of polyfluoroalkyl substances: a review . Environ Sci Technol 40 ( 11 ): 3463 – 3473 , PMID: , 10.1021/es052580b . 16786681 16. MacManus-Spencer LA , Tse ML , Hebert PC , Bischel HN , Luthy RG . 2010 . Binding of perfluorocarboxylates to serum albumin: a comparison of analytical methods . Anal Chem 82 ( 3 ): 974 – 981 , PMID: , 10.1021/ac902238u . 20039637 17. Ng CA , Hungerbühler K . 2014 . Bioaccumulation of perfluorinated alkyl acids: observations and models . Environ Sci Technol 48 ( 9 ): 4637 – 4648 , PMID: , 10.1021/es404008g . 24762048 18. Luebker DJ , Hansen KJ , Bass NM , Butenhoff JL , Seacat AM . 2002 . Interactions of flurochemicals with rat liver fatty acid-binding protein . Toxicology 176 ( 3 ): 175 – 185 , PMID: , 10.1016/s0300-483x(02)00081-1 . 12093614 19. Cao Y , Ng C . 2021 . Absorption, distribution, and toxicity of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in the brain: a review . Environ Sci Process Impacts 23 ( 11 ): 1623 – 1640 , PMID: , 10.1039/d1em00228g . 34533150 20. Han X , Nabb DL , Russell MH , Kennedy GL , Rickard RW . 2012 . Renal elimination of perfluorocarboxylates (PFCAs) . Chem Res Toxicol 25 ( 1 ): 35 – 46 , PMID: , 10.1021/tx200363w . 21985250 21. Zhao W , Zitzow JD , Ehresman DJ , Chang SC , Butenhoff JL , Forster J , et al. 2015 . Na + /taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide and apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter are involved in the disposition of perfluoroalkyl sulfonates in humans and rats . Toxicol Sci 146 ( 2 ): 363 – 373 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfv102 . 26001962 PMC4607751 22. Zhao W , Zitzow JD , Weaver Y , Ehresman DJ , Chang SC , Butenhoff JL , et al. 2017 . Organic anion transporting polypeptides contribute to the disposition of perfluoroalkyl acids in humans and rats . Toxicol Sci 156 ( 1 ): 84 – 95 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfw236 . 28013215 PMC6075085 23. Jackson TW , Scheibly CM , Polera ME , Belcher SM . 2021 . Rapid characterization of human serum albumin binding for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances using differential scanning fluorimetry . Environ Sci Technol 55 ( 18 ): 12291 – 12301 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.1c01200 . 34495656 PMC8651256 24. Zhang L , Ren XM , Guo LH . 2013 . Structure-based investigation on the interaction of perfluorinated compounds with human liver fatty acid binding protein . Environ Sci Technol 47 ( 19 ): 11293 – 11301 , PMID: , 10.1021/es4026722 . 24006842 25. Nakagawa H , Terada T , Harada KH , Hitomi T , Inoue K , Inui KI , et al. 2009 . Human organic anion transporter hOAT4 is a transporter of perfluorooctanoic acid . Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 105 ( 2 ): 136 – 138 , PMID: , 10.1111/j.1742-7843.2009.00409.x . 19371258 26. Weaver YM , Ehresman DJ , Butenhoff JL , Hagenbuch B . 2010 . Roles of rat renal organic anion transporters in transporting perfluorinated carboxylates with different chain lengths . Toxicol Sci 113 ( 2 ): 305 – 314 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfp275 . 19915082 PMC2807038 27. Yang CH , Glover KP , Han X . 2010 . Characterization of cellular uptake of perfluorooctanoate via organic anion-transporting polypeptide 1A2, organic anion transporter 4, and urate transporter 1 for their potential roles in mediating human renal reabsorption of perfluorocarboxylates . Toxicol Sci 117 ( 2 ): 294 – 302 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfq219 . 20639259 28. Armitage JM , Erickson RJ , Luckenbach T , Ng CA , Prosser RS , Arnot JA , et al. 2017 . Assessing the bioaccumulation potential of ionizable organic compounds: current knowledge and research priorities . Environ Toxicol Chem 36 ( 4 ): 882 – 897 , PMID: , 10.1002/etc.3680 . 27992066 PMC6172661 29. Sanchez-Covarrubias L , Slosky LM , Thompson BJ , Davis TP , Ronaldson PT . 2014 . Transporters at CNS barrier sites: obstacles or opportunities for drug delivery? Curr Pharm Des 20 ( 10 ): 1422 – 1449 , PMID: , 10.2174/13816128113199990463 . 23789948 PMC3913737 30. Katakura M , Kudo N , Tsuda T , Hibino Y , Mitsumoto A , Kawashima Y . 2007 . Rat organic anion transporter 3 and organic anion transporting polypeptide 1 mediate perfluorooctanoic acid transport . J Health Sci 53 ( 1 ): 77 – 83 , 10.1248/jhs.53.77 . 31. Yang CH , Glover KP , Han X . 2009 . Organic anion transporting polypeptide (Oatp) 1a1-mediated perfluorooctanoate transport and evidence for a renal reabsorption mechanism of Oatp1a1 in renal elimination of perfluorocarboxylates in rats . Toxicol Lett 190 ( 2 ): 163 – 171 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.toxlet.2009.07.011 . 19616083 32. Jain RB , Ducatman A . 2019 . Perfluoroalkyl substances follow inverted U-shaped distributions across various stages of glomerular function: implications for future research . Environ Res 169 : 476 – 482 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envres.2018.11.033 . 30530087 33. Jain RB . 2021 . Impact of kidney hyperfiltration on concentrations of selected perfluoroalkyl acids among US adults for various disease groups . Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 28 ( 17 ): 21499 – 21515 , PMID: , 10.1007/s11356-020-11855-0 . 33411299 34. Helal I , Fick-Brosnahan GM , Reed-Gitomer B , Schrier RW . 2012 . Glomerular hyperfiltration: definitions, mechanisms and clinical implications . Nat Rev Nephrol 8 ( 5 ): 293 – 300 , PMID: , 10.1038/nrneph.2012.19 . 22349487 35. Robertson JL . 1998 . Chemically induced glomerular injury: a review of basic mechanisms and specific xenobiotics . Toxicol Pathol 26 ( 1 ): 64 – 72 , PMID: , 10.1177/019262339802600109 . 9502389 36. Moon J . 2021 . Perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) exposure and kidney damage: causal interpretation using the US 2003–2018 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) datasets . Environ Pollut 288 : 117707 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117707 . 34252714 37. Kudo N , Katakura M , Sato Y , Kawashima Y . 2002 . Sex hormone-regulated renal transport of perfluorooctanoic acid . Chem Biol Interact 139 ( 3 ): 301 – 316 , PMID: , 10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00006-6 . 11879818 38. Nakagawa H , Hirata T , Terada T , Jutabha P , Miura D , Harada KH , et al. 2008 . Roles of organic anion transporters in the renal excretion of perfluorooctanoic acid . Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 103 ( 1 ): 1 – 8 , PMID: , 10.1111/j.1742-7843.2007.00155.x . 18373647 39. Alexander SPH , Kelly E , Mathie A , Peters JA , Veale EL , Armstrong JF , et al. 2019 . The Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2019/20: transporters . Br J Pharmacol 176 ( suppl 1 ): S397 – S493 , PMID: , 10.1111/bph.14753 . 31710713 PMC6844579 40. Brandoni A , Torres AM . 2015 . Altered renal expression of relevant clinical drug transporters in different models of acute uremia in rats. Role of urea levels . Cell Physiol Biochem 36 ( 3 ): 907 – 916 , PMID: , 10.1159/000430265 . 26065488 41. Mónica Torres A , Mac Laughlin M , Muller A , Brandoni A , Anzai N , Endou H . 2005 . Altered renal elimination of organic anions in rats with chronic renal failure . Biochim Biophys Acta 1740 ( 1 ): 29 – 37 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.bbadis.2005.03.002 . 15878738 42. Tramonti G , Xie P , Wallner EI , Danesh FR , Kanwar YS . 2006 . Expression and functional characteristics of tubular transporters: P-glycoprotein, PEPT1, and PEPT2 in renal mass reduction and diabetes . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 291 ( 5 ): F972 – F980 , PMID: , 10.1152/ajprenal.00110.2006 . 17028260 43. Schneider R , Sauvant C , Betz B , Otremba M , Fischer D , Holzinger H , et al. 2007 . Downregulation of organic anion transporters OAT1 and OAT3 correlates with impaired secretion of para-aminohippurate after ischemic acute renal failure in rats . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 292 ( 5 ): F1599 – F1605 , PMID: , 10.1152/ajprenal.00473.2006 . 17244891 44. Ji L , Masuda S , Saito H , Inui K . 2002 . Down-regulation of rat organic cation transporter rOCT2 by 5/6 nephrectomy . Kidney Int 62 ( 2 ): 514 – 524 , PMID: , 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00464.x . 12110012 45. Naud J , Michaud J , Beauchemin S , Hébert MJ , Roger M , Lefrancois S , et al. 2011 . Effects of chronic renal failure on kidney drug transporters and cytochrome P450 in rats . Drug Metab Dispos 39 ( 8 ): 1363 – 1369 , PMID: , 10.1124/dmd.111.039115 . 21525170 46. Olsen GW , Burris JM , Ehresman DJ , Froehlich JW , Seacat AM , Butenhoff JL , et al. 2007 . Half-life of serum elimination of perfluorooctanesulfonate, perfluorohexanesulfonate, and perfluorooctanoate in retired fluorochemical production workers . Environ Health Perspect 115 ( 9 ): 1298 – 1305 , PMID: , 10.1289/ehp.10009 . 17805419 PMC1964923 47. Bartell SM . 2012 . Bias in half-life estimates using log concentration regression in the presence of background exposures, and potential solutions . J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol 22 ( 3 ): 299 – 303 , PMID: , 10.1038/jes.2012.2 . 22333729 48. Bartell SM , Calafat AM , Lyu C , Kato K , Ryan PB , Steenland K . 2010 . Rate of decline in serum PFOA concentrations after granular activated carbon filtration at two public water systems in Ohio and West Virginia . Environ Health Perspect 118 ( 2 ): 222 – 228 , PMID: , 10.1289/ehp.0901252 . 20123620 PMC2831921 49. Worley RR , Moore SM , Tierney BC , Ye X , Calafat AM , Campbell S , et al. 2017 . Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in human serum and urine samples from a residentially exposed community . Environ Int 106 : 135 – 143 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2017.06.007 . 28645013 PMC5673082 50. Li Y , Fletcher T , Mucs D , Scott K , Lindh CH , Tallving P , et al. 2018 . Half-lives of PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA after end of exposure to contaminated drinking water . Occup Environ Med 75 ( 1 ): 46 – 51 , PMID: , 10.1136/oemed-2017-104651 . 29133598 PMC5749314 51. Gomis MI , Vestergren R , Nilsson H , Cousins IT . 2016 . Contribution of direct and indirect exposure to human serum concentrations of perfluorooctanoic acid in an occupationally exposed group of ski waxers . Environ Sci Technol 50 ( 13 ): 7037 – 7046 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.6b01477 . 27304840 52. Xu Y , Fletcher T , Pineda D , Lindh CH , Nilsson C , Glynn A , et al. 2020 . Serum half-lives for short- and long-chain perfluoroalkyl acids after ceasing exposure from drinking water contaminated by firefighting foam . Environ Health Perspect 128 ( 7 ): 077004 , PMID: , 10.1289/EHP6785 . 32648786 PMC7351026 53. Blake BE , Pinney SM , Hines EP , Fenton SE , Ferguson KK . 2018 . Associations between longitudinal serum perfluoroalkyl substance (PFAS) levels and measures of thyroid hormone, kidney function, and body mass index in the Fernald Community Cohort . Environ Pollut 242 ( pt A ): 894 – 904 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.07.042 . 30373035 PMC6309414 54. Sayers EW , Bolton EE , Brister JR , Canese K , Chan J , Comeau DC , et al. 2022 . Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology Information . Nucleic Acids Res 50 ( D1 ): D20 – D26 , PMID: , 10.1093/nar/gkab1112 . 34850941 PMC8728269 55. Popovic M , Zaja R , Smital T . 2010 . Organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATP) in zebrafish ( Danio rerio ): phylogenetic analysis and tissue distribution . Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 155 ( 3 ): 327 – 335 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.11.011 . 19931635 56. Uhlén M , Fagerberg L , Hallström BM , Lindskog C , Oksvold P , Mardinoglu A , et al. 2015 . Tissue-based map of the human proteome . Science 347 ( 6220 ), 10.1126/science.1260419 . 25613900 57. Louisse J , Dellafiora L , van den Heuvel JJMW , Rijkers D , Leenders L , Dorne JLCM , et al. 2023 . Perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are substrates of the renal human organic anion transporter 4 (OAT4) . Arch Toxicol 97 ( 3 ): 685 – 696 , PMID: , 10.1007/s00204-022-03428-6 . 36436016 PMC9968691 58. Popovic M , Zaja R , Fent K , Smital T . 2014 . Interaction of environmental contaminants with zebrafish organic anion transporting polypeptide, Oatp1d1 ( Slco1d1 ) . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 280 ( 1 ): 149 – 158 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2014.07.015 . 25088042 59. Popovic M , Zaja R , Fent K , Smital T . 2013 . Molecular characterization of zebrafish Oatp1d1 ( Slco1d1 ), a novel organic anion-transporting polypeptide . J Biol Chem 288 ( 47 ): 33894 – 33911 , PMID: , 10.1074/jbc.M113.518506 . 24126916 PMC3837131 60. Ekaratanawong S , Anzai N , Jutabha P , Miyazaki H , Noshiro R , Takeda M , et al. 2004 . Human organic anion transporter 4 is a renal apical organic anion/dicarboxylate exchanger in the proximal tubules . J Pharmacol Sci 94 ( 3 ): 297 – 304 , PMID: , 10.1254/jphs.94.297 . 15037815 61. Hanhijärvi H , Ophaug RH , Singer L . 1982 . The sex-related difference in perfluorooctanoate excretion in the rat . Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 171 ( 1 ): 50 – 55 , PMID: , 10.3181/00379727-171-41476 . 7145938 62. Ducatman A , Luster M , Fletcher T . 2021 . Perfluoroalkyl substance excretion: effects of organic anion-inhibiting and resin-binding drugs in a community setting . Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 85 : 103650 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.etap.2021.103650 . 33819618 63. FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration). 2021 . Drug Development and Drug Interactions: Table of Substrates, Inhibitors and Inducers . https://www.Fda.Gov/Drugs/Drug-Interactions-Labeling/Drug-Development-and-Drug-Interactions-Table-Substrates-Inhibitors-and-Inducers [ accessed 8 December 2021 ]. 64. Tan PK , Ostertag TM , Miner JN . 2016 . Mechanism of high affinity inhibition of the human urate transporter URAT1 . Sci Rep 6 ( 1 ): 34995 , PMID: , 10.1038/srep34995 . 27713539 PMC5054527 65. Gomis MI , Vestergren R , MacLeod M , Mueller JF , Cousins IT . 2017 . Historical human exposure to perfluoroalkyl acids in the United States and Australia reconstructed from biomonitoring data using population-based pharmacokinetic modelling . Environ Int 108 : 92 – 102 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2017.08.002 . 28818713 66. Jain RB , Ducatman A . 2022 . Serum concentrations of selected perfluoroalkyl substances for US females compared to males as they age . Sci Total Environ 842 : 156891 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.156891 . 35753482 67. Cha SH , Sekine T , Kusuhara H , Yu E , Kim JY , Kim DK , et al. 2000 . Molecular cloning and characterization of multispecific organic anion transporter 4 expressed in the placenta . J Biol Chem 275 ( 6 ): 4507 – 4512 , PMID: , 10.1074/jbc.275.6.4507 . 10660625 68. Roth M , Obaidat A , Hagenbuch B . 2012 . OATPs, OATs and OCTs: the organic anion and cation transporters of the SLCO and SLC22A gene superfamilies . Br J Pharmacol 165 ( 5 ): 1260 – 1287 , PMID: , 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01724.x . 22013971 PMC3372714 69. Kinzi J , Grube M , Meyer zu Schwabedissen HE . 2021 . OATP2B1—the underrated member of the organic anion transporting polypeptide family of drug transporters? Biochem Pharmacol 188 : 114534 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114534 . 33794186 70. Kimura O , Fujii Y , Haraguchi K , Kato Y , Ohta C , Koga N , et al. 2020 . Effects of perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids on the uptake of sulfobromophthalein via organic anion transporting polypeptides in human intestinal Caco-2 cells . Biochem Biophys Rep 24 : 100807 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.bbrep.2020.100807 . 32964147 PMC7490525 71. Ahn SY , Nigam SK . 2009 . Toward a systems level understanding of organic anion and other multispecific drug transporters: a remote sensing and signaling hypothesis . Mol Pharmacol 76 ( 3 ): 481 – 490 , PMID: , 10.1124/mol.109.056564 . 19515966 PMC2730381 72. VanWert AL , Gionfriddo MR , Sweet DH . 2010 . Organic anion transporters: discovery, pharmacology, regulation and roles in pathophysiology . Biopharm Drug Dispos 31 ( 1 ): 1 – 71 , PMID: , 10.1002/bdd.693 . 19953504 73. Wu W , Dnyanmote AV , Nigam SK . 2011 . Remote communication through solute carriers and ATP binding cassette drug transporter pathways: an update on the remote sensing and signaling hypothesis . Mol Pharmacol 79 ( 5 ): 795 – 805 , PMID: , 10.1124/mol.110.070607 . 21325265 PMC3082935 74. Nigam SK . 2015 . What do drug transporters really do? Nat Rev Drug Discov 14 ( 1 ): 29 – 44 , PMID: , 10.1038/nrd4461 . 25475361 PMC4750486 75. Seeger MA , van Veen HW . 2009 . Molecular basis of multidrug transport by ABC transporters . Biochim Biophys Acta 1794 ( 5 ): 725 – 737 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.bbapap.2008.12.004 . 19135557 76. Vanden Heuvel JP , Thompson JT , Frame SR , Gillies PJ . 2006 . Differential activation of nuclear receptors by perfluorinated fatty acid analogs and natural fatty acids: a comparison of human, mouse, and rat peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α, -β, and -γ, liver X receptor-β, and retinoid X receptor-α . Toxicol Sci 92 ( 2 ): 476 – 489 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfl014 . 16731579 77. Dassuncao C , Pickard H , Pfohl M , Tokranov AK , Li M , Mikkelsen B , et al. 2019 . Phospholipid levels predict the tissue distribution of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances in a marine mammal . Environ Sci Technol Lett 6 ( 3 ): 119 – 125 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.estlett.9b00031 . 33283018 PMC7713714 78. Mikkaichi T , Suzuki T , Onogawa T , Tanemoto M , Mizutamari H , Okada M , et al. 2004 . Isolation and characterization of a digoxin transporter and its rat homologue expressed in the kidney . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 ( 10 ): 3569 – 3574 , PMID: , 10.1073/pnas.0304987101 . 14993604 PMC373503 79. Kamp D , Haest CWM . 1998 . Evidence for a role of the multidrug resistance protein (MRP) in the outward translocation of NBD-phospholipids in the erythrocyte membrane . Biochim Biophys Acta 1372 ( 1 ): 91 – 101 , PMID: , 10.1016/s0005-2736(98)00049-2 . 9651491 80. Sohnius A , Kamp D , Haest CWM . 2003 . ATP and GSH dependence of MRP1-mediated outward translocation of phospholipid analogs in the human erythrocyte membrane . Mol Membr Biol 20 ( 4 ): 299 – 305 , PMID: , 10.1080/0968768031000114033 . 14578045 81. Raggers RJ , van Helvoort A , Evers R , van Meer G . 1999 . The human multidrug resistance protein MRP1 translocates sphingolipid analogs across the plasma membrane . J Cell Sci 112 ( pt 3 ): 415 – 422 , PMID: , 10.1242/jcs.112.3.415 . 9885294 82. van Helvoort A , Smith AJ , Sprong H , Fritzsche I , Schinkel AH , Borst P , et al. 1996 . MDR1 P-glycoprotein is a lipid translocase of broad specificity, while MDR3 P-glycoprotein specifically translocates phosphatidylcholine . Cell 87 ( 3 ): 507 – 517 , PMID: , 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81370-7 . 8898203 83. Dankers ACA , Sweep FCGJ , Pertijs JCLM , Verweij V , van den Heuvel JJMW , Koenderink JB , et al. 2012 . Localization of breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) in endocrine organs and inhibition of its transport activity by steroid hormones . Cell Tissue Res 349 ( 2 ): 551 – 563 , PMID: , 10.1007/s00441-012-1417-5 . 22581381 PMC3414710 84. Dankers ACA , Roelofs MJE , Piersma AH , Sweep FCGJ , Russel FGM , van den Berg M , et al. 2013 . Endocrine disruptors differentially target ATP-binding cassette transporters in the blood–testis barrier and affect Leydig cell testosterone secretion in vitro . Toxicol Sci 136 ( 2 ): 382 – 391 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kft198 . 24014645 85. Van Biesen W , Vanholder R , Lameire N . 2006 . Defining acute renal failure: RIFLE and beyond . Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 1 ( 6 ): 1314 – 1319 , PMID: , 10.2215/CJN.02070606 . 17699363 86. Makris K , Spanou L . 2016 . Acute kidney injury: definition, pathophysiology and clinical phenotypes . Clin Biochem Rev 37 ( 2 ): 85 – 98 , PMID: . 28303073 PMC5198510 87. Webster AC , Nagler EV , Morton RL , Masson P . 2017 . Chronic kidney disease . Lancet 389 ( 10075 ): 1238 – 1252 , PMID: , 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32064-5 . 27887750 88. Eckardt KU , Berns JS , Rocco MV , Kasiske BL . 2009 . Definition and classification of CKD: the debate should be about patient prognosis—a position statement from KDOQI and KDIGO . Am J Kidney Dis 53 ( 6 ): 915 – 920 , PMID: , 10.1053/j.ajkd.2009.04.001 . 19406541 89. Moody EC , Coca SG , Sanders AP . 2018 . Toxic metals and chronic kidney disease: a systematic review of recent literature . Curr Environ Health Rep 5 ( 4 ): 453 – 463 , PMID: , 10.1007/s40572-018-0212-1 . 30338443 PMC6590508 90. Zheng L , Kuo CC , Fadrowski J , Agnew J , Weaver VM , Navas-Acien A . 2014 . Arsenic and chronic kidney disease: a systematic review . Curr Environ Health Rep 1 ( 3 ): 192 – 207 , PMID: , 10.1007/s40572-014-0024-x . 25221743 PMC4159179 91. Harari F , Sallsten G , Christensson A , Petkovic M , Hedblad B , Forsgard N , et al. 2018 . Blood lead levels and decreased kidney function in a population-based cohort . Am J Kidney Dis 72 ( 3 ): 381 – 389 , PMID: , 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.02.358 . 29699886 92. Di Giusto G , Anzai N , Endou H , Torres AM . 2008 . Elimination of organic anions in response to an early stage of renal ischemia-reperfusion in the rat: role of basolateral plasma membrane transporters and cortical renal blood flow . Pharmacology 81 ( 2 ): 127 – 136 , PMID: , 10.1159/000110555 . 17971680 93. Follman KE , Dave RA , Morris ME . 2018 . Effects of renal impairment on transporter-mediated renal reabsorption of drugs and renal drug–drug interactions: a simulation-based study . Biopharm Drug Dispos 39 ( 4 ): 218 – 231 , PMID: , 10.1002/bdd.2128 . 29635775 PMC5929165 94. Laouari D , Yang R , Veau C , Blanke I , Friedlander G . 2001 . Two apical multidrug transporters, P-gp and MRP2, are differently altered in chronic renal failure . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 280 ( 4 ): F636 – F645 , PMID: , 10.1152/ajprenal.2001.280.4.F636 . 11249855 95. Ljubojević M , Breljak D , Herak-Kramberger CM , Anzai N , Sabolić I . 2016 . Expression of basolateral organic anion and cation transporters in experimental cadmium nephrotoxicity in rat kidney . Arch Toxicol 90 ( 3 ): 525 – 541 , PMID: , 10.1007/s00204-015-1450-8 . 25588984 96. Wen S , Wang C , Huo X , Meng Q , Liu Z , Yang S , et al. 2018 . JBP485 attenuates vancomycin-induced nephrotoxicity by regulating the expressions of organic anion transporter (Oat) 1, Oat3, organic cation transporter 2 (Oct2), multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (Mrp2) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) in rats . Toxicol Lett 295 : 195 – 204 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.toxlet.2018.06.1220 . 29964132 97. Wu W , Bush KT , Nigam SK . 2017 . Key role for the organic anion transporters, OAT1 and OAT3, in the in vivo handling of uremic toxins and solutes . Sci Rep 7 ( 1 ): 4939 , PMID: , 10.1038/s41598-017-04949-2 . 28694431 PMC5504054 98. Sakurai Y , Motohashi H , Ueo H , Masuda S , Saito H , Okuda M , et al. 2004 . Expression levels of renal organic anion transporters (OATs) and their correlation with anionic drug excretion in patients with renal diseases . Pharm Res 21 ( 1 ): 61 – 67 , PMID: , 10.1023/b:pham.0000012153.71993.cb . 14984259 99. Sun H , Frassetto L , Benet LZ . 2006 . Effects of renal failure on drug transport and metabolism . Pharmacol Ther 109 ( 1–2 ): 1 – 11 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2005.05.010 . 16085315 100. Huo X , Liu K . 2018 . Renal organic anion transporters in drug–drug interactions and diseases . Eur J Pharm Sci 112 : 8 – 19 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.11.001 . 29109021 101. Liu T , Meng Q , Wang C , Liu Q , Guo X , Sun H , et al. 2012 . Changes in expression of renal Oat1, Oat3 and Mrp2 in cisplatin-induced acute renal failure after treatment of JBP485 in rats . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 264 ( 3 ): 423 – 430 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2012.08.019 . 22992436 102. Schwenk MH , Pai AB . 2016 . Drug transporter function—implications in CKD . Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 23 ( 2 ): 76 – 81 , PMID: , 10.1053/j.ackd.2016.01.016 . 26979146 103. Watanabe H , Sakaguchi Y , Sugimoto R , Kaneko KI , Iwata H , Kotani S , et al. 2014 . Human organic anion transporters function as a high-capacity transporter for p -cresyl sulfate, a uremic toxin . Clin Exp Nephrol 18 ( 5 ): 814 – 820 , PMID: , 10.1007/s10157-013-0902-9 . 24185403 104. Brosius FC III , Hostetter TH , Kelepouris E , Mitsnefes MM , Moe SM , Moore MA , et al. 2006 . Detection of chronic kidney disease in patients with or at increased risk of cardiovascular disease . Circulation 114 ( 10 ): 1083 – 1087 , PMID: , 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.177321 . 16894032 105. Koye DN , Magliano DJ , Nelson RG , Pavkov ME . 2018 . The global epidemiology of diabetes and kidney disease . Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 25 ( 2 ): 121 – 132 , PMID: , 10.1053/j.ackd.2017.10.011 . 29580576 PMC11000253 106. Sarnak MJ , Levey AS , Schoolwerth AC , Coresh J , Culleton B , Hamm LL , et al. 2003 . Kidney disease as a risk factor for development of cardiovascular disease . Circulation 108 ( 17 ): 2154 – 2169 , PMID: , 10.1161/01.CIR.0000095676.90936.80 . 14581387 107. Wanner C , Inzucchi SE , Lachin JM , Fitchett D , von Eynatten M , Mattheus M , et al. 2016 . Empagliflozin and progression of kidney disease in type 2 diabetes . N Engl J Med 375 ( 4 ): 323 – 334 , PMID: , 10.1056/NEJMoa1515920 . 27299675 108. Joy MS , Roberts BV , Wang J , Hu Y , Hogan SL , Falk RJ . 2014 . A pilot study of leukocyte expression patterns for drug metabolizing enzyme and transporter transcripts in autoimmune glomerulonephritis . Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 52 ( 4 ): 303 – 313 , PMID: , 10.5414/CP201972 . 24548980 PMC4123858 109. Erman F , Tuzcu M , Orhan C , Sahin N , Sahin K . 2014 . Effect of lycopene against cisplatin-induced acute renal injury in rats: organic anion and cation transporters evaluation . Biol Trace Elem Res 158 ( 1 ): 90 – 95 , PMID: , 10.1007/s12011-014-9914-x . 24531880 110. Kwon O , Wang WW , Miller S . 2008 . Renal organic anion transporter 1 is maldistributed and diminishes in proximal tubule cells but increases in vasculature after ischemia and reperfusion . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 295 ( 6 ): F1807 – F1816 , PMID: , 10.1152/ajprenal.90409.2008 . 18922885 111. Matsuzaki T , Watanabe H , Yoshitome K , Morisaki T , Hamada A , Nonoguchi H , et al. 2007 . Downregulation of organic anion transporters in rat kidney under ischemia/reperfusion-induced qacute renal failure . Kidney Int 71 ( 6 ): 539 – 547 , PMID: , 10.1038/sj.ki.5002104 . 17245393 112. Matsuzaki T , Morisaki T , Sugimoto W , Yokoo K , Sato D , Nonoguchi H , et al. 2008 . Altered pharmacokinetics of cationic drugs caused by down-regulation of renal rat organic cation transporter 2 ( Slc22a2 ) and rat multidrug and toxin extrusion 1 ( Slc47a1 ) in ischemia/reperfusion-induced acute kidney injury . Drug Metab Dispos 36 ( 4 ): 649 – 654 , PMID: , 10.1124/dmd.107.019869 . 18180268 113. Morisaki T , Matsuzaki T , Yokoo K , Kusumoto M , Iwata K , Hamada A , et al. 2008 . Regulation of renal organic ion transporters in cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury and uremia in rats . Pharm Res 25 ( 11 ): 2526 – 2533 , PMID: , 10.1007/s11095-008-9668-2 . 18612803 114. Aleksunes LM , Augustine LM , Scheffer GL , Cherrington NJ , Manautou JE . 2008 . Renal xenobiotic transporters are differentially expressed in mice following cisplatin treatment . Toxicology 250 ( 2–3 ): 82 – 88 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.tox.2008.06.009 . 18640236 PMC2570650 115. Guo X , Meng Q , Liu Q , Wang C , Sun H , Peng J , et al. 2013 . JBP485 improves gentamicin-induced acute renal failure by regulating the expression and function of Oat1 and Oat3 in rats . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 271 ( 2 ): 285 – 295 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2013.04.029 . 23707770 116. Ulu R , Dogukan A , Tuzcu M , Gencoglu H , Ulas M , İlhan N , et al. 2012 . Regulation of renal organic anion and cation transporters by thymoquinone in cisplatin induced kidney injury . Food Chem Toxicol 50 ( 5 ): 1675 – 1679 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.082 . 22414646 117. Deguchi T , Takemoto M , Uehara N , Lindup WE , Suenaga A , Otagiri M . 2005 . Renal clearance of endogenous hippurate correlates with expression levels of renal organic anion transporters in uremic rats . J Pharmacol Exp Ther 314 ( 2 ): 932 – 938 , PMID: , 10.1124/jpet.105.085613 . 15879000 118. Nagura M , Tamura Y , Kumagai T , Hosoyamada M , Uchida S . 2016 . Uric acid metabolism of kidney and intestine in a rat model of chronic kidney disease . Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 35 ( 10–12 ): 550 – 558 , PMID: , 10.1080/15257770.2016.1163379 . 27906625 119. Gai Z , Chu L , Hiller C , Arsenijevic D , Penno CA , Montani JP , et al. 2014 . Effect of chronic renal failure on the hepatic, intestinal, and renal expression of bile acid transporters . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 306 ( 1 ): F130 – F137 , PMID: , 10.1152/ajprenal.00114.2013 . 24197062 120. Lu H , Klaassen C . 2008 . Gender differences in mRNA expression of ATP-binding cassette efflux and bile acid transporters in kidney, liver, and intestine of 5/6 nephrectomized rats . Drug Metab Dispos 36 ( 1 ): 16 – 23 , PMID: , 10.1124/dmd.107.014845 . 17855625 121. Avanasi R , Shin HM , Vieira VM , Bartell SM . 2016 . Variability and epistemic uncertainty in water ingestion rates and pharmacokinetic parameters, and impact on the association between perfluorooctanoate and preeclampsia in the C8 Health Project population . Environ Res 146 : 299 – 307 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envres.2016.01.011 . 26796985 PMC4761513 122. Brochot C , Casas M , Manzano-Salgado C , Zeman FA , Schettgen T , Vrijheid M , et al. 2019 . Prediction of maternal and foetal exposures to perfluoroalkyl compounds in a Spanish birth cohort using toxicokinetic modelling . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 379 : 114640 , , 10.1016/j.taap.2019.114640 . 31251942 123. Ciffroy P , Alfonso B , Altenpohl A , Banjac Z , Bierkens J , Brochot C , et al. 2016 . Modelling the exposure to chemicals for risk assessment: a comprehensive library of multimedia and PBPK models for integration, prediction, uncertainty and sensitivity analysis—the MERLIN-Expo tool . Sci Total Environ 568 : 770 – 784 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.03.191 . 27169730 124. Convertino M , Church TR , Olsen GW , Liu Y , Doyle E , Elcombe CR , et al. 2018 . Stochastic pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling for assessing the systemic health risk of perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) . Toxicol Sci 163 ( 1 ): 293 – 306 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfy035 . 29462473 PMC5920327 125. Ngueta G , Longnecker MP , Yoon M , Ruark CD , Clewell HJ III , Andersen ME , et al. 2017 . Quantitative bias analysis of a reported association between perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) and endometriosis: the influence of oral contraceptive use . Environ Int 104 : 118 – 121 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2017.03.023 . 28392065 126. Ruark CD , Song G , Yoon M , Verner MA , Andersen ME , Clewell HJ III , et al. 2017 . Quantitative bias analysis for epidemiological associations of perfluoroalkyl substance serum concentrations and early onset of menopause . Environ Int 99 : 245 – 254 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2016.11.030 . 27927583 127. Sharma RP , Schuhmacher M , Kumar V . 2017 . Developing integrated PBPK/PD coupled mechanistic pathway model (miRNA-BDNF): an approach towards system toxicology . Toxicol Lett 280 : 79 – 91 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.toxlet.2017.08.003 . 28818579 128. Verner MA , Ngueta G , Jensen ET , Fromme H , Völkel W , Nygaard UC , et al. 2016 . A simple pharmacokinetic model of prenatal and postnatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) . Environ Sci Technol 50 ( 2 ): 978 – 986 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.5b04399 . 26691063 129. Wambaugh JF , Barton HA , Setzer RW . 2008 . Comparing models for perfluorooctanoic acid pharmacokinetics using Bayesian analysis . J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 35 ( 6 ): 683 – 712 , PMID: , 10.1007/s10928-008-9108-2 . 19130186 130. Bernstein AS , Kapraun DF , Schlosser PM . 2021 . A model template approach for rapid evaluation and application of physiologically based pharmacokinetic models for use in human health risk assessments: a case study on per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances . Toxicol Sci 182 ( 2 ): 215 – 228 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfab063 . 34077538 PMC11256709 131. Chen Q , Chou WC , Lin Z . 2022 . Integration of toxicogenomics and physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling in human health risk assessment of perfluorooctane sulfonate . Environ Sci Technol 56 ( 6 ): 3623 – 3633 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.1c06479 . 35194992 132. Chou WC , Lin Z . 2019 . Bayesian evaluation of a physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) to characterize the interspecies uncertainty between mice, rats, monkeys, and humans: development and performance verification . Environ Int 129 : 408 – 422 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2019.03.058 . 31152982 133. Chou WC , Lin Z . 2020 . Probabilistic human health risk assessment of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) by integrating in vitro , in vivo toxicity, and human epidemiological studies using a Bayesian-based dose-response assessment coupled with physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling approach . Environ Int 137 : 105581 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2020.105581 . 32087483 134. Chou WC , Lin Z . 2021 . Development of a gestational and lactational physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) in rats and humans and its implications in the derivation of health-based toxicity values . Environ Health Perspect 129 ( 3 ): 037004 , PMID: , 10.1289/EHP7671 . 33730865 PMC7969127 135. Deepika D , Sharma RP , Schuhmacher M , Kumar V . 2021 . Risk assessment of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) using dynamic age dependent physiologically based pharmacokinetic model (PBPK) across human lifetime . Environ Res 199 : 111287 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envres.2021.111287 . 34000270 136. Dzierlenga MW , Moreau M , Song G , Mallick P , Ward PL , Campbell JL , et al. 2020 . Quantitative bias analysis of the association between subclinical thyroid disease and two perfluoroalkyl substances in a single study . Environ Res 182 : 109017 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envres.2019.109017 . 31865168 137. Dzierlenga MW , Allen BC , Clewell HJ III , Longnecker MP . 2020 . Pharmacokinetic bias analysis of an association between clinical thyroid disease and two perfluoroalkyl substances . Environ Int 141 : 105784 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2020.105784 . 32408218 138. Fàbrega F , Kumar V , Schuhmacher M , Domingo JL , Nadal M . 2014 . PBPK modeling for PFOS and PFOA: validation with human experimental data . Toxicol Lett 230 ( 2 ): 244 – 251 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.01.007 . 24440341 139. Fàbrega F , Kumar V , Benfenati E , Schuhmacher M , Domingo JL , Nadal M . 2015 . Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling of perfluoroalkyl substances in the human body . Toxicol Environ Chem 97 ( 6 ): 814 – 827 , 10.1080/02772248.2015.1060976 . 140. Fàbrega F , Nadal M , Schuhmacher M , Domingo JL , Kumar V . 2016 . Influence of the uncertainty in the validation of PBPK models: a case-study for PFOS and PFOA . Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 77 : 230 – 239 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.yrtph.2016.03.009 . 26993749 141. Kim SJ , Shin H , Lee YB , Cho HY . 2018 . Sex-specific risk assessment of PFHxS using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model . Arch Toxicol 92 ( 3 ): 1113 – 1131 , PMID: , 10.1007/s00204-017-2116-5 . 29143853 142. Kim SJ , Choi EJ , Choi GW , Lee YB , Cho HY . 2019 . Exploring sex differences in human health risk assessment for PFNA and PFDA using a PBPK model . Arch Toxicol 93 ( 2 ): 311 – 330 , PMID: , 10.1007/s00204-018-2365-y . 30483840 143. Loccisano AE , Campbell JL Jr , Andersen ME , Clewell HJ III. 2011 . Evaluation and prediction of pharmacokinetics of PFOA and PFOS in the monkey and human using a PBPK model . Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 59 ( 1 ): 157 – 175 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.yrtph.2010.12.004 . 21168463 144. Loccisano AE , Campbell JL Jr , Butenhoff JL , Andersen ME , Clewell HJ III. 2012 . Comparison and evaluation of pharmacokinetics of PFOA and PFOS in the adult rat using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model . Reprod Toxicol 33 ( 4 ): 452 – 467 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.04.006 . 21565266 145. Loccisano AE , Campbell JL Jr , Butenhoff JL , Andersen ME , Clewell HJ III. 2012 . Evaluation of placental and lactational pharmacokinetics of PFOA and PFOS in the pregnant, lactating, fetal and neonatal rat using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model . Reprod Toxicol 33 ( 4 ): 468 – 490 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.07.003 . 21872655 146. Loccisano AE , Longnecker MP , Campbell JL Jr , Andersen ME , Clewell HJ III. 2013 . Development of PBPK models for PFOA and PFOS for human pregnancy and lactation life stages . J Toxicol Environ Health A 76 ( 1 ): 25 – 57 , PMID: , 10.1080/15287394.2012.722523 . 23151209 PMC3502013 147. Rovira J , Martínez MÁ , Sharma RP , Espuis T , Nadal M , Kumar V , et al. 2019 . Prenatal exposure to PFOS and PFOA in a pregnant women cohort of Catalonia, Spain . Environ Res 175 : 384 – 392 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envres.2019.05.040 . 31154228 148. Sweeney LM . 2022 . Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling of perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS) in humans . Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 129 : 105099 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.yrtph.2021.105099 . 34933042 149. Verner MA , Loccisano AE , Morken NH , Yoon M , Wu H , McDougall R , et al. 2015 . Associations of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) with lower birth weight: an evaluation of potential confounding by glomerular filtration rate using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model (PBPK) . Environ Health Perspect 123 ( 12 ): 1317 – 1324 , PMID: , 10.1289/ehp.1408837 . 26008903 PMC4671243 150. Vidal A , Babut M , Garric J , Beaudouin R . 2019 . Elucidating the fate of perfluorooctanoate sulfonate using a rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) physiologically-based toxicokinetic model . Sci Total Environ 691 : 1297 – 1309 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.105 . 31466209 151. Worley RR , Yang X , Fisher J . 2017 . Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling of human exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid suggests historical non drinking-water exposures are important for predicting current serum concentrations . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 330 : 9 – 21 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2017.07.001 . 28684146 PMC5664934 152. Worley RR , Fisher J . 2015 . Application of physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modeling to explore the role of kidney transporters in renal reabsorption of perfluorooctanoic acid in the rat . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 289 ( 3 ): 428 – 441 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2015.10.017 . 26522833 PMC4662604 153. Wu H , Yoon M , Verner MA , Xue J , Luo M , Andersen ME , et al. 2015 . Can the observed association between serum perfluoroalkyl substances and delayed menarche be explained on the basis of puberty-related changes in physiology and pharmacokinetics? Environ Int 82 : 61 – 68 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2015.05.006 . 26043300 154. Mittal VK , Ng CA . 2018 . Formation of PFAAs in fish through biotransformation: a PBPK approach . Chemosphere 202 : 218 – 227 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.03.064 . 29571142 155. Ng CA , Hungerbühler K . 2013 . Bioconcentration of perfluorinated alkyl acids: how important is specific binding? Environ Sci Technol 47 ( 13 ): 7214 – 7223 , PMID: , 10.1021/es400981a . 23734664 156. Cheng W , Ng CA . 2021 . Bayesian refinement of the permeability-limited physiologically based pharmacokinetic model for perfluorooctanoic acid in male rats . Chem Res Toxicol 34 ( 11 ): 2298 – 2308 , PMID: , 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00193 . 34705448 157. Lin Z , Gehring R , Mochel JP , Lavé T , Riviere JE . 2016 . Mathematical modeling and simulation in animal health—part II: principles, methods, applications, and value of physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling in veterinary medicine and food safety assessment . J Vet Pharmacol Ther 39 ( 5 ): 421 – 438 , PMID: , 10.1111/jvp.12311 . 27086878 158. Andersen ME . 2003 . Toxicokinetic modeling and its applications in chemical risk assessment . Toxicol Lett 138 ( 1–2 ): 9 – 27 , PMID: , 10.1016/s0378-4274(02)00375-2 . 12559690 159. Clewell HJ , Tan YM , Campbell JL , Andersen ME . 2008 . Quantitative interpretation of human biomonitoring data . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 231 ( 1 ): 122 – 133 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2008.04.021 . 18589468 160. U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2006 . Approaches for the Application of Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) Models and Supporting Data in Risk Assessment (Final Report) . EPA/600/R-05/043F . Washington, DC : National Center for Environmental Assessment . 161. Han X , Snow TA , Kemper RA , Jepson GW . 2003 . Binding of perfluorooctanoic acid to rat and human plasma proteins . Chem Res Toxicol 16 ( 6 ): 775 – 781 , PMID: , 10.1021/tx034005w . 12807361 162. Jain RB , Ducatman A . 2019 . Perfluoroalkyl acids serum concentrations and their relationship to biomarkers of renal failure: serum and urine albumin, creatinine, and albumin creatinine ratios across the spectrum of glomerular function among US adults . Environ Res 174 : 143 – 151 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.envres.2019.04.034 . 31077989 163. Benskin JP , De Silva AO , Martin LJ , Arsenault G , McCrindle R , Riddell N , et al. 2009 . Disposition of perfluorinated acid isomers in Sprague-Dawley rats; part 1: single dose . Environ Toxicol Chem 28 ( 3 ): 542 – 554 , PMID: , 10.1897/08-239.1 . 18939892 164. Munoz G , Duy SV , Labadie P , Botta F , Budzinski H , Lestremau F , et al. 2016 . Analysis of zwitterionic, cationic, and anionic poly- and perfluoroalkyl surfactants in sediments by liquid chromatography polarity-switching electrospray ionization coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry . Talanta 152 : 447 – 456 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.talanta.2016.02.021 . 26992541 165. Eldasher LM , Wen X , Little MS , Bircsak KM , Yacovino LL , Aleksunes LM . 2013 . Hepatic and renal Bcrp transporter expression in mice treated with perfluorooctanoic acid . Toxicology 306 : 108 – 113 , PMID: , 10.1016/j.tox.2013.02.009 . 23435180 PMC3645321 166. Cannon RE , Richards AC , Trexler AW , Juberg CT , Sinha B , Knudsen GA , et al. 2020 . Effect of GenX on P-glycoprotein, breast cancer resistance protein, and multidrug resistance–associated protein 2 at the blood–brain barrier . Environ Health Perspect 128 ( 3 ): 037002 , PMID: , 10.1289/EHP5884 . 32212926 PMC7137913 167. Weiss JM , Andersson PL , Lamoree MH , Leonards PEG , van Leeuwen SPJ , Hamers T . 2009 . Competitive binding of poly- and perfluorinated compounds to the thyroid hormone transport protein transthyretin . Toxicol Sci 109 ( 2 ): 206 – 216 , PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfp055 . 19293372 168. Upson K , Shearston JA , Kioumourtzoglou MA . 2022 . An epidemiologic review of menstrual blood loss as an excretion route for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances . Curr Environ Health Rep 9 ( 1 ): 29 – 37 , PMID: , 10.1007/s40572-022-00332-0 . 35267175 PMC9876536 169. Wang L , Sweet DH . 2013 . Renal organic anion transporters (SLC22 family): expression, regulation, roles in toxicity, and impact on injury and disease . AAPS J 15 ( 1 ): 53 – 69 , PMID: , 10.1208/s12248-012-9413-y . 23054972 PMC3535093 170. Fenton A , Montgomery E , Nightingale P , Peters AM , Sheerin N , Wroe AC , et al. 2018 . Glomerular filtration rate: new age- and gender-specific reference ranges and thresholds for living kidney donation . BMC Nephrol 19 ( 1 ): 336 , PMID: , 10.1186/s12882-018-1126-8 . 30466393 PMC6249883 