                                  STATE OF NEW YORK
                      PUBLIC HEALTH AND HEALTH PLANNING COUNCIL

                                            AGENDA

                                        December 8, 2022

                          •   90 Church Street, Conference Rooms 4 A/B, NYC

                  •    Empire State Plaza, Concourse Level, Meeting Room 6, Albany

       Immediately following the Committee on Codes, Regulations, and Legislation Meeting
                            (Codes scheduled to begin at 10:00 a.m.)


  I.   INTRODUCTION OF OBSERVERS

       Jeffrey Kraut, Chair

 II.   APPROVAL OF MINUTES

              October 6, 2022 PHHPC Meeting Minutes

III.   REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ACTIVITIES

         A. Report of the Department of Health

              Mary T. Bassett, M.D., M.P.H., Commissioner of Health

         B. Report of the Office of Public Health

             Ursula Bauer, Ph.D., MPH, Deputy Commissioner, Office of Public Health

         C. Report of the Office of Health Equity and Human Rights

             Johanne Morne, Deputy Commissioner, Office of Health Equity and Human Rights

         D. Report of the Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management

             John Morley, M.D., Deputy Commissioner, Office of Primary Care and Health Systems
             Management

         E. Report of the Office of Aging and Long Term Care

             Adam Herbst, Deputy Commissioner, Office of Aging and Long Term Care




                                                1
IV.   ADOPTION OF LETTER TO LEGISLATURE

         Adoption of Letter to Legislative Health Committee Chairs

            Jeffrey Kraut, PHHPC Chair

V.    REGULATION

         Report of the Committee on Codes, Regulations, and Legislation

            Thomas Holt, Chair of the Committee on Codes, Regulations, and Legislation

         For Emergency Adoption

            20-06 Amendment of Part 2, Section 405.3 and Addition of Section 58-1.14 to
                  Title 10 NYCRR
                  (Investigation of Communicable Disease)

            20-07 Addition of Section 2.60 to Title 10 NYCRR
                  (Face Coverings for COVID-19 Prevention)

         For Information

            22-16 Amendment of Subpart 5-1 of Title 10 NYCRR
                  (Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs))

         For Adoption

            22-11 Amendment of Subpart 5-1 of Title 10 NYCRR
                  (Public Water Systems)

VI.   PROJECT REVIEW RECOMMENDATIONS AND ESTABLISHMENT ACTIONS

       A.      Report of the Committee on Establishment and Project Review

               Peter Robinson, Chair of Establishment and Project Review Committee

              APPLICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF HEALTH CARE FACILITIES

      CATEGORY 1: Applications Recommended for Approval – No Issues or Recusals,
                  Abstentions/Interests

                                         NO APPLICATIONS




                                                 2
CATEGORY 2: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:

        PHHPC Member Recusals
        Without Dissent by HSA
        Without Dissent by Establishment and Project Review Committee

CON Application

 Acute Care Services - Construction

           Number                Applicant/Facility                 E.P.R.C. Recommendation

  1.       221248 C              NYU Langone Hospital –             Contingent Approval
                                 Long Island
                                 (Nassau County)
                                 Dr. Kalkut - Recusal

CATEGORY 3: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:

        No PHHPC Member Recusals
        Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
        Contrary Recommendations by HSA

                          NO APPLICATIONS

CATEGORY 4: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:

          PHHPC Member Recusals
          Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
          Contrary Recommendation by HSA

                          NO APPLICATIONS

CATEGORY 5: Applications Recommended for Disapproval by OHSM or
            Establishment and Project Review Committee - with or without Recusals

                          NO APPLICATIONS

CATEGORY 6: Applications for Individual Consideration/Discussion

                          NO APPLICATIONS




                                          3
 B.   APPLICATIONS FOR ESTABLISHMENT AND
      CONSTRUCTION OF HEALTH CARE FACILITIES

CATEGORY 1: Applications Recommended for Approval – No Issues or Recusals,
            Abstentions/Interests

CON Applications

Ambulatory Surgery Centers – Establish/Construct
        Number               Applicant/Facility               E.P.R.C. Recommendation

 1.     221191 B             Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Contingent Approval
                             Center, LLC
                             (Suffolk County)

 2.     221206 E             Northern Westchester Facility    Contingent Approval
                             Project LLC d/b/a Yorktown
                             Center for Special Surgery
                             (Westchester County)

 3.     221213 E             Performance Surgical Center, LLC Contingent Approval
                             d/b/a Performance Surgical Center
                             (Kings County)

Diagnostic and Treatment Centers – Establish/Construct

        Number               Applicant/Facility               E.P.R.C. Recommendation

 1.     221145 B             Apple Care Health                Contingent Approval
                             (Kings County)

 2.     221227 B             Parkchester DTC LLC d/b/a        Contingent Approval
                             Parkchester Diagnostic and
                             Treatment Center
                             (Bronx County)

 3.     221231 B             A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp.   Contingent Approval
                             (Richmond County)

 4.     221265 B             JAL 28 LLC d/b/a A Merryland     Contingent Approval
                             Health Center
                             (Kings County)




                                      4
 Residential Health Care Facilities – Establish/Construct

           Number                Applicant/Facility                 E.P.R.C. Recommendation

  1.       192204 E              Highland Nursing Home, Inc.        Contingent Approval
                                 d/b/a North Country Nursing &
                                 Rehabilitation Center
                                 (St. Lawrence County)

  2.       202034 E              Ulster NH Operations LLC d/b/a     Contingent Approval
                                 Golden Hill Center for
                                 Rehabilitating and Nursing
                                 (Ulster County)

  3.       211087 E              The Premier Center for             Contingent Approval
                                 Rehabilitation of
                                 Westchester, LLC d/b/a
                                 Springvale Nursing and
                                 Rehabilitation Center
                                 (Westchester County)

 CATEGORY 2: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:
        PHHPC Member Recusals
        Without Dissent by HSA
        Without Dissent by Establishment and Project Review Committee
                          NO APPLICATIONS

CATEGORY 3: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:
        No PHHPC Member Recusals
        Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
        Contrary Recommendations by or HSA

                          NO APPLICATIONS
CATEGORY 4: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:

          PHHPC Member Recusals
          Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
          Contrary Recommendation by HAS

                          NO APPLICATIONS

CATEGORY 5: Applications Recommended for Disapproval by OHSM or
            Establishment and Project Review Committee - with or without Recusals

                          NO APPLICATIONS



                                          5
        CATEGORY 6: Applications for Individual Consideration/Discussion

                               NO APPLICATIONS

VII.    NEXT MEETINGS

        January 26, 2023 (Albany and NYC)
        February 9, 2023 (Albany and NYC)

VIII.   ADJOURNMENT




                                              6
                                   State of New York
                       Public Health and Health Planning Council

                                        Minutes
                                     October 6, 2022

       The meeting of the Public Health and Health Planning Council was held on Thursday,
October 6, 2022 at the Empire State Plaza, Concourse Level, Meeting Room 6, Albany, New York,
and 90 Church Street, 4th Floor CR 4 A/B, NYC. Jeffrey Kraut, Chair presided.

COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT

 Dr. Howard Berliner – NYC                       Mr. Peter Robinson – NYC
 Dr. Jo Boufford - NYC                           Dr. John Rugge – Albany
 Dr. Angel Gutiérrez – NYC                       Ms. Nilda Soto – NYC
 Mr. Thomas Holt – NYC                           Dr. Theodore Strange - NYC
 Dr. Gary Kalkut – NYC                           Mr. Hugh Thomas - NYC
 Mr. Scott LaRue – NYC                           Dr. Kevin Watkins – Albany
 Mr. Harvey Lawrence - NYC                       Dr. Patsy Yang – NYC
 Dr. Sabina Lim – NYC                            Commissioner Bassett Ex-Officio - Albany
 Ms. Ann Monroe – NYC

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH STAFF PRESENT

 Dr. Ursula Bauer - Albany                       Ms. Kathy Marks – NYC
 Ms. Valarie Deetz – Zoom                        Dr. James McDonald
 Ms. Barbara DelCogliano - Zoom                  Ms. Marthe Ngwashi - NYC
 Mr. Mark Furnish – Albany                       Dr. John Morley - Albany
 Ms. Shelly Glock – Albany                       Ms. Johanne Morne - Albany
 Mr. Michael Heeran – Albany                     Mr. Travis O’Donnell - Albany
 Mr. Mark Hennessey - NYC                        Mr. Jason Riegert - Albany
 Mr. Adam Herbst – Zoom                          Ms. Claudette Royal - Albany
 Dr Eugene Heslin – Albany                       Ms. Stephanie Schulman - NYC
 Ms. Celeste Johnson - NYC                       Ms. Kimberly Scott - Zoom
 Mr. Jonathan Karmel - Albany                    Ms. Angela Smith - Albany
 Mr. Michael Kharfen - Albany                    Mr. Michael Stelluti - Zoom
 Ms. Colleen Leonard- NYC                        Ms. Jennifer Treacy - Albany
 Ms. Karen Madden - Zoom
 Mr. George Macko – Albany

INTRODUCTION

     Mr. Kraut called the meeting to order and welcomed Council members,
Commissioner Bassett, meeting participants and observers.


                                             1
MS. SOTO RETIREMENT CONGRATULATIONS

       Mr. Kraut congratulated Ms. Soto on her recent retirement from the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine and noted that she will continue to serve on the Council. Please see pages 1
and 2 of the transcript.

APPROVAL OF THE MEETING MINUTES OF JUNE 2, 2022, JULY 28, 2022 AND
SEPTEMBER 15, 2022

       Mr. Kraut asked for a motion to approve the June 2, 2022 Minutes of the Public Health
and Health Planning Council meeting. Dr. Berliner motioned for approval. Dr. Gutiérrez
seconded the motion. The minutes were unanimously adopted. Please refer to page 2 of the
attached transcript.

        Mr. Kraut asked for a motion to approve the July 28, 2022 Minutes of the Public Health
and Health Planning Council meeting. Dr. Berliner motioned for approval. Dr. Rugge seconded
the motion. The minutes were unanimously adopted. Please refer to page 2 of the attached
transcript.

       Mr. Kraut asked for a motion to approve the September 15, 2022 Minutes of the Special
Public Health and Health Planning Council meeting. Dr. Berliner motioned for approval.
Dr. Gutiérrez seconded the motion. The minutes were unanimously adopted. Please refer to
pages 2 and 3 of the attached transcript.

REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ACTIVITIES

       Mr. Kraut introduced Dr. Bassett to give the Report on the Activities of the Department.

        Dr. Bassett began her report by giving an update on COVID. As of October 5, 2022,
New York was running close to 21 cases per 100,000, with 2,425 patients hospitalized with
COVID. We are still losing people to COVID. We had 19 new deaths reported through our
surveillance system yesterday. As you all are aware, we have reduced the restrictions that we had
related to public health measures of masking and distancing. The Department is relying
increasingly on the protection that vaccines provide. Vaccination is what has changed the face of
COVID and reduced its impact in terms of severity and death. The new Bivalent booster is here
and are available. They will greatly improve our ability to protect New Yorkers from the rising
rates of transmission that we expect to see in winter months. We are also expecting to see Pfizer
and Moderna approve this new Bivalent vaccine for emergency use in children, children five and
older for the Pfizer vaccine, which has been really the mainstay of MRNA vaccines or vaccines
in general in our state and for children six and over for Moderna. Dr. Bassett encouraged
everyone who is eligible to get their booster to go out and get their booster.




                                                2
        Dr. Bassett also noted that the flu season upon us and reminded everyone to get their flu
shot as flu cases are on the rise in the state and at this time, flu transmission in the state is
considered widespread. To get this point across, we're going to be launching a flu COVID
vaccine campaign. The Department is going to be promoting the Bivalent vaccine through paid
medium. That will include targeted digital advertising, social media and other means.

         Dr. Bassett next spoke on the topic of polio. On July 21, 2022, the Department
announced that a young person was diagnosed with paralytic polio who was resident in Rockland
County. The Department began looking at wastewater because people polio virus in human guts.
The Department began looking at it in Rockland and other counties to see if we could detect
polio virus in wastewater in these communities. We found evidence of polio virus in Orange
County, Sullivan County, in New York City and Nassau County. This virus has been sequenced
and linked genetically to the person who developed clinical paralytic polio. This is the evidence
that we have for the ongoing circulation. The Department has continued to detect virus in
wastewater and is working hard to address this. The answer is simple to proclaim, but
challenging to execute, and that is vaccination. Dr. Bassett explained that the Department is
providing operational and outreach and communications support to these counties, working
collaboratively with their health departments and with other community partners to share the
facts, increase awareness and encourage people to be vaccinated. The declaration of an
emergency enabled us to expand our pool of vaccinators for polio, an important part of our
response.

        Dr. Bassett moved to discuss monkeypox, as she described as something that was really
just an artifact of medical textbooks. Until mid-May of this year, when we began the current
outbreak of monkeypox, which has spread to involve more than 90 countries and has involved,
virtually every state in the United States has diagnosed a person with monkeypox since mid-
May. The latest data in October was New York had 3,889 cases. Almost all of these cases are in
New York City and in the Downstate area, meaning two thirds of the 334 cases diagnosed
outside of New York City have been in Long Island and Westchester. Dr. Bassett stated that on
July 28, 2022 she declared monkeypox an imminent threat to public health, and that was
followed by the Governor's declaration, and it was subsequently followed by a national act. The
Department has provided clinical guidance for the testing of monkeypox through initially all
public health labs, but now increasingly also private labs. About a quarter of current testing is
done by our Wadsworth Lab and the rest is now done by private labs. The Department is
working hard to distribute the vaccine through both federal and local partners.

        Dr. Bassett noted that we are encouraged that the rate of increase of monkeypox cases has
really slowed. It appears that we have, you know, sort of reached a point where certainly the
outbreak is no longer growing. This is true in New York City as well as in the rest of the state.
This is the joint action of the affected community as well as the availability of vaccine. The
Department continues to engage communities and provide information and work with advocates
and activists and the LGBTQ community. We have longstanding relationships with these,
principally through our AIDS Institute, but also through other parts of the Department. Dr.
Bassett explained that the Council will hear more from Deputy Commissioner for Health Equity
and Human Rights, Joanne Morne. Ms. Morne has already talked with you about the importance
of the act that the Council is just taking and designating monkeypox as a sexually transmitted
                                                   3
infection. Just to reiterate, the Department does not want a sexually active minor. Regardless of
whether parents want their children to be sexually active or whether any adult wants them to.
The Department is aware that children report that by the time they finished high school, half
have engaged in sexual activity. If you are a young boy engaging in sex with men or boys, we
want you to have the right to protect yourself. You have just enabled that. This is simply about
access and the protection of our youth.

         Dr. Bassett spoke on the topic of the Prevention Agenda. We are on a five year from
2019 to 2024. A plan of the Prevention Agenda, which calls on cross-sector partnerships to
address the facts of everyday life that we refer to as social determinants of health that enhance
the burden of disease. There are five priority areas for specific action. Most of this work is
overseen by our Office of Public Health. Dr. Bassett described the priority areas. They include
the prevention of chronic disease, the promotion of a healthy and safe environment, the
promotion of health for women, infants and children, the promotion of well-being and the
prevention of mental health and substance use disorders, the prevention of communicable
diseases. The Prevention Agenda provides communities with recommended evidence based
interventions and information on promising practices and guidance, and that emphasizes
interventions that don't place blame on individuals for unhealthy patterns, but addresses the need
for healthy environments that promote healthy choices and the need for equity across
communities. There are action plans around all of these priority areas that are broken down into
focus areas, goals and objectives. We're committed to tracking progress with measures that
reflect the implementation and impact of evidence based interventions. These are all tracked in
the prevention agendas dashboard, which can show progress or challenges. Dr. Bassett stated that
you might imagine, the COVID pandemic posed a substantial challenge to the Prevention
Agenda and she is very pleased to be talking with you about it as we readdress these important
causes of health.

         Dr. Bassett described each category beginning with preventing chronic disease. The
Department has seen an improvement in the proportion of adults over 50 who have had a
colorectal screen. It went from 66.3% to 71.8% in one year. There has been progress in asthma
management with asthma related emergency departments in the pediatric age group, and that's
people under 18. Fell from 138 in 2016 to 100 in 2019. Medicaid Managed Care members
identified with persistent asthma and given the right medications for their asthma management. It
has been rising steadily. It was just at 50% in 2014 and had risen to 60% in 2019. Obviously
that's progress, but hardly perfect. The Department would like to see that proportion continue to
go up. Obesity is a stunning challenge to the health of our nation and our State. The obesity rate
in children which had leveled and begun to drop until 2015 has now started to inch up again. We
estimate that 13.9% of children, 2 to 4 years old who are in the WIC program are obese. Obesity
begins very early. Also important is smoking cessation. The Department has been helping
smokers to quit. With smokers enrolled in Medicaid, the proportion dropping from 24.3% to
19.9% in one year. Additionally, we track blood sugar elevations as a measure of diabetes in the
population. The Department is hopeful that we are doing better at managing people with
diabetes. Blood sugar elevations have fallen between 2019 and 2020. They fell from 69.2% to
60.4%. That was quite a big drop for just one year.


                                                4
         Dr. Bassett stated the next objective is to promote a healthy and safe environment. We
have seen a lot of improvements across all categories. Crash related pedestrian fatalities rose,
however. The Commissioner noted that we own up to our challenges. Crash related pedestrian
fatalities rose from 1.3 to 1.9 per 100,000. The annual number of days that the air quality was
above 100, which is unhealthy. That number of days has increased. It was 12 in 2020. It went up
to 20 days in 2021. We had hoped to achieve a level of three days by 2024, but at this time our
confidence in achieving that is waning. There has been progress. The percent of people living in
a certified climate smart community has doubled from 15.1% to 31.3%. That's between 2019 and
2021. The number of homes inspected for lead and other health hazards, as well as homes tested
and mitigated for radon, has significantly improved, and public water systems that were awarded
infrastructure improvement assistance has doubled from 28 public water systems to 56.

         Dr. Bassett next moved to the third objective, promoting healthy women, infants and
children. Most of our focus areas, there have been declines, not improvements. We are all very
well aware of the rising tide of opioid use, including fatal overdoses and the number of newborns
born with neonatal withdrawal symptoms per 1,000 live births has improved despite that from
9.6 6 to 7.9. That's between 2018 and 2019. Additionally, New York is getting more
participation in the early intervention program where the proportion of families who meet the
state standard for impact on family scale has improved from 67% to 93.9% in 2020. Newborns
with neonatal withdrawal and improvements in delivery of services in the early intervention
program. There is less rosy news in the maternal mortality rate. That rate rose from 18.1 in 2016
to 19.3 in 2019. The disparity in black and white maternal death rates also widened. The ratio
grew from 4.68 in 2014 to 5.31 in 2019. We also saw a reversal of progress in the proportion of
births that are preterm from the lowest level in 2015, which was 8.7%, which was pretty close to
the prevention agenda goal of 8.3%. We have instead seen a rise from 8.7% to 9.2% in 2019. The
percentage of women who talk with a healthcare provider about ways to prepare for a healthy
pregnancy fell from 43% to 35%.

        Dr. Bassett stated that suicide on a national level has been rising in youth with deaths
rising from 4.6 per 100,000 to 6.2. Mental health and substance use disorders are, and many of
the focus areas under this pillar showed improvement, despite the fact that we are all aware that
people's mental health has truly been challenged in recent years. These data come from before
COVID that the proportion of adolescents with major depressive episodes grew from 10.8% in
2018 to 12.9%. There were these improvements. Binge drinking in young adults improved.
People who got at least one buprenorphine prescription for opioid use disorder improved.
Emergency department visits for any opioid overdose improved slightly. Indicated reports of
child abuse and new maltreatment fell.

        Dr. Bassett spoke on the last category, communicable diseases, with a heavy focus on
COVID, polio and on monkeypox, but there are other communicable diseases which we concern
ourselves with, and in this case, sexually transmitted infections, old infections of gonorrhea.
These ones we have known of for many, many years. gonorrhea, chlamydia and syphilis are
going up and our immunization rate in children has declined. There has been some progress. For
example, the immunization of adolescents for HPV, the principal risk factor for a number of
common cancers, including among girls, cervical cancer. That proportion rose from 28 to 30,
nearly 40% in 2020. The number of newly diagnosed HIV cases declined between 2010 and
                                                 5
2019. I spend some time on all of these issues just to remind all of us of the scope of work of the
Health Department. The Department is very much committed to the whole health of the
population, which extends beyond the control of microbes to include the environment, non-
communicable and chronic disease. She noted that she is very much looking forward to our
continued progress on COVID and again encouraged everyone who is eligible for a booster to
get boosted, so that we can turn to these and direct department attention to these long standing
challenges to the health of our population.

      Dr. Bassett concluded her report. To review the complete report and members questions
and comments please see pages 3 through 8 of the transcript.

REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ACTIVITIES

Report on the Activities of the Office of Health Equity and Human Rights

       Mr. Kraut introduced Ms. Morne to give the Report on the Activities of the Office of
Health Equity and Human Rights.

         Ms. Morne introduced herself as the Deputy Commissioner of the newly created Office
of Health Equity and Human Rights within the Department of Health. She stated that she is
proud to lead this effort as well as this team. The Department's reorganization has created a step
towards the department's goal of increasing diversity, equity and inclusion within our workforce
as a part of the overarching mission to build a healthier, more equitable New York State. While
critical milestones have been achieved by the Department, we know that we must continue to
prioritize our response to the persistent, glaring disparities, so gains are realized equitably by all
populations. No matter what progress has been made in the department, we cannot achieve our
goals to improve health outcomes if some communities remain left behind. The Office of Health
Equity and Human Rights is charged with working across the department to address health
disparities, as well as to reduce those disparities across racial, ethnic and socioeconomic groups
while leveraging data to inform policy and improve overall health outcomes. In brief, the goal is
to improve health equity, reduce health disparities, and better support marginalized and
underserved communities. The Office is currently made up of three established offices within the
department that includes; the AIDS Institute, the Office of Minority Health and Health
Disparities Prevention, as well as the Office of Gun Violence Prevention.

        Ms. Morne stated the Department is in the process of building an additional office, the
Office of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion. Collectively, these offices have a broad portfolio. The
AIDS Institute oversees services related to HIV, AIDS, STI's and Hepatitis C. The AIDS
Institute also houses the Office of Drug User Health that works towards the health and wellness
of individuals who use drugs, as well as supports the LGBTQ Health and Human Services
Network. The Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities Prevention works to ensure that
all New Yorkers have access to health care services and other support services with an
overarching objective to ensure that marginalized communities are prioritized in the efforts that
we make to achieve health for all. The Office of Gun Violence Prevention, newly established
about a year and a half ago, was developed to focus on the public health impact of gun violence
within a number of vulnerable communities across our state. Community engagement is the
                                                6
foundation of the work that we do across the department and certainly within this office through
close allyship with community partners and stakeholders. It is the Department’s intention to
build on the historic advancements that have been made as it relates to the work that cuts across
equity, health care access, promotion of anti-stigma and certainly anti-racist structure as well as
the preservation of human rights.

        Ms. Morne explained the Department has set a number of ambitious goals for this office
to achieve by the end of the year. She gave a few examples, including the establishment of three
working groups that will help to inform DOH planning, multiple state agency planning and
community stakeholder priority setting. She also stated that the office will be working to initiate
the development of the New York State Department of Health, Health Equity and Human Rights
Blueprint in an effort to offer a universal set of goals and objectives. The Department will also be
working to develop and facilitate Department of Health staff training related to diversity, equity
and inclusion. She noted that many of us are already at the table working to establish a
department wide definition of health equity as well as health disparities. The Department will
continue to do the work regarding data modernization.

        Mr. Morne stated that on behalf of the entire team that already has done tremendous work
within this office, we look forward to our continued work ahead. We are absolutely committed to
working towards the goal of achieving sustainable change, the process of making sustainable
improvements that will last over time.

       Ms. Morne concluded her report. To view the complete report and Members comments
and questions, please see pages 8 through 10 of the transcript.

REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ACTIVITIES

Report on the Activities of the Office of Public Health

       Mr. Kraut introduced Dr. Bauer to give the Report on the Activities of the Office of
Public Health.

         Dr. Bauer began her report by giving an update on the Office of Public Health’s (OPH)
work on multiple public health emergencies to include the on going COVID response and our
continuing efforts to slow or even stop the spread of MPV, monkey pox and polio along with all
of our usual responses. In addition to our unprecedented emergency responses, the Department is
also working hard to rebuild the Department and the Office of Public Health. We need to rebuild
from the disruption we experienced during COVID when greater numbers of staff retired or left
the department, standard operating procedures sometimes fell by the wayside, and expectations
of that 24/7 work cycle exhausted staff and reduced morale. These issues continue to affect the
department and the office. The Department also needs to rebuild from a decade of declining
resources prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning with that hiring freeze back in 2008 that
was lifted in 2021 and regular budget cuts to the Department throughout the twenty teens. These
left the Department in a weakened condition even before the pandemic arrived. Dr. Bauer noted
that she will focus her report on OPH's rebuilding efforts. It is through progress toward
rebuilding that we improve our capacity for our emergency response and regain our ability to
wholly focus on our public health priorities. The Department has underwent a modest
                                                 7
restructuring back in August and adopted eight strategic priorities to guide our work over the
next three years. These strategic priorities do not replace the current efforts, but rather build on
them and provide a frame from which to guide our progress. Aspects of the restructuring that
affect OPH our rebuild efforts in addition to the exciting new offices that have been created
include the location of the regional offices within the Office of Public Health, the transition of
our Office of Emergency Preparedness to the Executive Deputy Commissioner and then as you
heard from Deputy Commissioner Morne and the transition of the AIDS Institute and Office of
Gun Violence Prevention to the new Office of Health Equity and Human Rights. The strategic
priorities of particular relevance to the rebuild effort are making DOH a great place to work,
making DOH an impactful, collaborative and efficient organization, preparing for the next
emergency and strengthening the relationship between the department and the local health
departments.

         Dr. Bauer explained OPH's rebuild efforts are focused on hiring staff as a top priority,
and we've onboarded hundreds of staff in the past year. The progress is slow, however, because
the hiring process is slow and we're not in a great hiring environment and because many new
hires come from within the ranks of the Department, which is great because we're promoting
people and giving people new opportunities. Of course, the Department is also creating another
vacancy that needs to be filled. Even as we do all this hiring, more people retire or leave the
department for other opportunities. Regaining our full strength will take years and this work is
underway. She noted that she is thrilled to welcome the regional offices to the Office of Public
Health. The regional offices are critical to the Department's ability to reach into communities, to
support the local health departments, and to restore the trust that was shaken during COVID. The
regional offices themselves are somewhat fragile structures, though, with no funding stream of
their own and dependent on programs for their staff. Many regional office staff, like many OPH
staff are grant funded, so they lack the flexibility to address core or emerging public health needs
that fall outside their particular scope.

        Dr. Bauer stated the Department needs to develop an operating model for the regional
offices that ensures that basic structure to each, a basic complement of staff, and a robust ability
to engage in communities and provide strategic resources to the local health departments, this
work is underway. The success and impact of our public health work is dependent upon the
success and impact of our local health departments, like the Office of Public Health and the
department overall, LHD's were hard hit by the COVID pandemic response. Losing staff and
having difficulty hiring slowed by cumbersome bureaucratic processes. These have plagued all
of us in our public health endeavors. In addition, the COVID response severely stressed the
relationship between the Department and the local health departments. The Department is
working hard to rebuild and strengthen those relationships and partnered to re-establish biweekly
leadership meetings with the steering committee and biweekly meetings with the full
membership. The Department has also instituted a quarterly meetings with Dr. Bassett and the
local health departments. Dr. Bassett is the first commissioner to hold quarterly meetings with
the local health departments. In June, we completed more than twenty focus groups with local
health department and DOH leaders to identify best practices from our COVID response that we
can institutionalize in our partnership going forward. Dr. Bauer noted that the Department is
wrapping up now a set of six workshops to establish group norms and supporting behaviors to
help OPH and the local health departments solve problems together.
                                                  8
        Dr. Bauer announced the rebuild efforts underway also include improving our critical
information technology infrastructure and data systems, finalizing plans for the new Wadsworth
Center Public Health Laboratory Building and preparing scores of budget proposals to address
our long standing and new needs to restore our strength and develop new capabilities and
programs. Much of this rebuild effort will be aided by a new grant from the CDC that we expect
to receive notice on this month called the Strengthening Public Health Workforce Foundational
Capabilities and Data Systems Grant. The Department has applied for about 135 million over
five years, with the bulk of those funds dedicated to workforce and frontloaded in year one of the
grant. Funding will address longstanding and new challenges to New York's public health
infrastructure. OPH proposes to make strategic investments in all three of those areas focusing
on workforce with more than eighty new positions proposed. While the grant addresses overall
public health capacity, CDC expects us to focus on communities that have been economically or
socially marginalized, are located in rural geographic areas or are composed of people from
racial or ethnic minorities, or those disproportionately affected by COVID-19 or other public
health priorities. Specifically, the Department will deploy these funds, these grant funds to
rebuild our Office of Public Health by creating and filling new positions, by expanding
environmental health, emergency preparedness and public health laboratory capacity, and by
improving the availability and use of workforce wellness opportunities that was another focus of
the funding opportunity. This will strengthen the regional office infrastructure, including new
staff positions to expand community engagement activities and re-establish a freestanding
regional office to serve the seventeen counties in the Capital District. The Department will
strengthen relationships with our local health departments through direct provision of funding to
local health departments to hire or retain staff or invest in other public health essentials.
Collaborations with local health departments to identify and deploy solutions to public health
problems. Ongoing and regular communication with our local health departments to foster that
strong partnership. The Department will enhance and expand public health training for local
health department and OPH staff through the establishment of partnerships and training units
within our office, with a focus on public health essentials, understanding and addressing root
causes of health inequities and building community engagement to empower, support and
transform communities. The Department will establish a multidisciplinary Health, Wealth and
Wellbeing Unit for the purpose of exploring health and non-health data, identifying innovative
cross-sector solutions and empowering communities to address foundational causes of health
inequities. Dr. Bauer also stated that the Department hopes to have resources to advance and
align with the work of our data modernization initiative that's currently underway as part of our
epidemiology and laboratory capacity grant. Anticipated outcomes over the five year project
period include increased hiring of diverse staff, improved organizational processes and systems
and progress toward a more modern and efficient data infrastructure. These will lead in the
longer term to a stronger and better equipped public health workforce and expanded and stronger
capacity to address longstanding and emerging public health challenges and increased
availability and effective use of public health and other data to drive program policy and other
decision making. Eventually, if sustained, this program of work will result in improved public
health outcomes, including reductions in health disparities and inequities.




                                                9
        Dr. Bauer noted that the grant is well-timed to align with the prevention agenda cycle
since the 2022-2024 Community Health Assessment and Community Health Improvement plans
are due at the end of the year. Planning for the 2025 to 2030 cycle is due to get underway early
next year. Dr. Bauer stated that this will be her first engagement with the prevention agenda
planning process since she joined the Department about a year ago. She stated that she optimistic
that with the Department’s progress on the rebuild efforts and a more manageable emergency
response demands, we and our local health department and nonprofit hospital partners will be
able to make the next six year cycle particularly effective and impactful for New York's
communities.
       Dr. Bauer concluded her report. To view the complete report and Members comments
and questions, please see pages 11 through 15 of the transcript.

REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ACTIVITIES

Report on the Activities of the Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management

       Mr. Kraut introduced Dr. Morley to give the Report on the activities of the Office of
Primary Care and Health Systems Management.

         Dr. Morley began his report by stating that with four acute care hospitals and two long
term care nursing homes in Western New York notified the Department that a strike vote had
taken place in mid September, raising some significant concerns and a great deal of effort came
into the department to work in support as this was developing. The tentative agreement has been
signed by the two unions, Communication Workers of America and 1199. The contract needs to
be ratified we hope, in mid-October. Survey Activity OPCHSM has conducted thirty-one surveys
of hospitals end stage renal disease providers over the month of August. That is the most recent
reporting month.
        Dr. Morley next gave an electronic survey update. The Department continues its five
days a week collection of data from hospitals regarding COVID, its activity and capacity. The
Department has seen a growing trend of COVID hospitalizations. We also conducted a one time
survey looking at obstetrics services in the state. The Department is reviewing that data right
now. The Safe Nurse Staffing Act that was passed a year ago and the Department has been
working intensely on the committees that have come out of that statute. Additional information
on this statute will be provided towards the end of the meeting.
        Dr. Morley announced that on September 20, 2022, the Department’s Bureau of
Emergency Medical Services and the State Trauma Systems convened families, friends and
colleagues to honor members of the EMS community who had passed in the line of duty. Ten
heroes names were added to the Tree of Life in Albany. The State Emergency Medical Advisory
Council meeting took place and there was extensive discussion about the increasing volume of
extended offload delays in hospital ER's around the state. The state EMS Council leadership has
raised this issue to the attention of the Department, additional response will be forthcoming. The
Bureau of Narcotic Enforcement, the drug takeback program continues to roll out statewide, with
collection receptacles now available in over 1,300 pharmacies, so far New Yorkers have returned
19,000 pounds of pharmaceutical waste. Additional pharmacies are offering collection
receptacles and mailed back envelopes by the day.
                                                 10
         Dr. Morley stated under work of the Center for Health Care Policy. The 2023 legislature
elected the New York State budget includes an appropriation for 2.5 million for the Nurses
Across New York program that will provide loan repayment for registered nurses and licensed
practical nurses who make an obligation to work for three years in an underserved area. The
legislation includes a provision that the Department of Health shall appoint a stakeholder work
group to develop recommendations and to implement any nanny recommendations by
September. The work group is comprised of associations representing nurses, general hospitals,
long term care and other health care facilities and includes representatives from twenty
organizations. The work group met in July, August and September and developed
recommendations. A report has been forwarded to the Governor's office. The definition of
underserved areas, award amounts and hardships may need to be considered if a nurse cannot
fulfill the three year obligation. The Department is currently drafting a solicitation of interest and
hope to have it finalized by the end of November and out for public consumption.

        Dr. Morley said in response to concerns that have been raised in the past sessions related
to primary care in the pandemic and public health emergencies, and thanked the policy office
folks for helping to construct the response to the committee related to primary care and the
pandemic. The Article 28 of the Public Health Law gives the Department direct regulatory
oversight over hospitals, including general hospitals, residential health care facilities and
diagnostic and treatment centers, including many but not all of FQHC's. There is not a similar
corresponding article within public health that pertains to private medical practices. As such, the
Department are statutorily limited in their response to implement surge and flex operations at
settings outside of Article 28 institutions. In addition to the legal limitations, state resources
would be necessary to monitor the implementation of surge and flex operations and to assist in
operations such as helping to divert patients. Based on the
Department's past experience in employing surge and flex operations, the Department believes in
an estate disaster emergency that impacts the health care delivery system. Focusing surge and
flex operations in acute care settings most efficiently uses such limited resources. Nevertheless,
the amendments to Title 10 of the New York Codes and Rules and Regulations Surge and Flex
Care Coordination System are not specific to general hospitals, but do cover regulated, quote,
health care facilities, end quote. Accordingly, if resources allow and the public health emergency
demands it, the Commissioner would have discretion to implement surge and flex operations in
D &TC's, including those of FQHC's that fall under Article 28. Lastly Dr. Morley noted that
regulations are identical to the Emergency Surge and Flex regulations were published in the State
Register as a proposed regulation. The public comment period closed on Article 28. There were
no comments related to Surge and Flex outside of Article 28 facilities in those comments.

        Dr. Morley concluded his report. To see the complete report please see pages 15 through
19 of the transcript.

REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ACTIVITIES




                                                 11
Report on the Activities of the Office of Aging and Long Term Care

       Mr. Kraut introduced Mr. Herbst to give the Report on the activities of the Office of
Aging and Long Term Care.

        Mr. Herbst began his report by providing the Council with some background of the new
Office of Aging and Long Term Care. The Department set forth some important priorities and
reorganized the way we work to better serve New Yorkers. One of those priorities was the
creation of the Office of Aging and Long Term Care (OALTC). OALTC will be focused on
optimizing the Department's talent and the integration of new systems and increasing diversity as
part of our overall mission to build a healthier, more equitable New York. OALTC will be
dedicated to the needs of aging and disabled New Yorkers. Mr. Herbst noted that he hopes this
new office will help to ensure aging New Yorkers have greater access not only to essential health
services, but to appropriate living settings and programs that reduce isolation. The vision we
have for this Office and our mission is to foster policy and programs and services that meet the
health and long term care needs of all New Yorkers. This includes support to those who seek to
age in place, as well as people who choose long term care in nursing facilities. OALTC has an
urgency to our mission. New York is already home to the fourth largest population of residents
over the age of 65. Almost 20% of the entire state. In the coming decade, we are facing a tidal
wave of aging New Yorkers. By 2030, a quarter of our state's population is projected to be over
60. As many of our aging baby boomers will seek the care and security of nursing homes or adult
care facilities. There is also nearly 100,000 New Yorkers residing in nursing home facilities and
hundreds of thousands receiving home care. Long term care spending accounts for nearly 35% of
the total state's Medicaid spending, and that's the state's largest cost driver. We can see this wave
approaching and the necessity of our work.

         Mr. Herbst noted that the Department needs to shore up our support for New York's most
vulnerable population, as Dr. Bassett referred to it earlier. Establishing this new Office of Aging
and long term care is an important first step to align the Department's expertise and resources for
greater impact not only for aging and disabled New Yorkers, but also for the families and
stakeholders and advocates upon who we all rely on. OALTC will be responsible for data
management and licensing and surveillance policy and finance, as well as communication
programs to help educate and build consensus. OALTC will also weave in programming to
address our mission to improve public health and health equity and address the social
determinants of health such as transportation, housing and nutrition. By placing the manifold of
issues surrounding long term care under one roof, we're not just elevating the issue, but we're
giving the new office the overall resources that we need and the power to build a network with
one aim. Again, this is to help serve aging New Yorkers and those who seek long term care
facilities.

        Mr. Herbst stated that one of our most important priorities is to ensure New Yorkers can
age in place for as long as possible with dignity and independence and have access to quality
care when they need it. The same holds true for all New Yorkers with disabilities. Both those
people who need short term rehabilitation and those who require long term care or need
additional supports to live meaningful lives in the community. In addition, the Governor's
proposed master plan for aging, which will lay the foundation for us to change the landscape of
                                                 12
aging and long term care in our state. A foundation that is designed to enforce the long term care
community for the long haul. The master plan will probably be inclusive, focusing on age
friendly health systems and public health initiatives. Again, such as housing and transportation,
community engagement, rural challenges and telehealth and digital strategies for social
engagement. The Department will measure outcomes, but most importantly, we will rely on
equity as a driving factor in the master plan. Aiming to open up alternatives to nursing homes
and facility based care and will convene with the efforts of the public and the private sector to
convene and create communities that promote healthy living and civic engagement.

        Mr. Herbst advised that OALTC also wants to look at other ideas, such as walkable
communities that promote exercise and reliance less on vehicles. OALTC will spearhead the
implementation and the execution of the master plan which will focus on creating a blueprint
together for strategies for government and the private sector and the not for profit sector to
support older New Yorkers. Ensuring ensure the state has policy and programs and they're
coordinated in aligned line to ensure New Yorkers can age in our state with freedom and dignity
and independence for as long as possible. The master plan is a response to the approaching wave.
The actions the Department is taking now will help us prepare for the challenges ahead. We
cannot do this alone. There's already been so much expertise coalescing around the master plan.
We are grateful for the inputs from stakeholders and advocates and organizations and welcome
insights to continue from all areas across the long term care ecosystem. The Department will
certainly rely on the partnership of you as a partner in addressing the health and long term care
needs of aging New Yorkers as well.

         Mr. Herbst stated that he looks forward to keeping all channels of communication open
with the Council as we build a more sustainable and integrated system of care. This includes the
areas of the mission from the role of the Ad Hoc Committee to the State Health Improvement
Plan, known as the Prevention Agenda that we have spoken about a handful of times already
today to the work done in committees and public health discussions, debate on the Committee of
Health Planning and the Committee on Codes and Regulations and Legislation, as well as the
activities related to the licensure and construction process completed.

         Mr. Herbst gave a quick update on six areas that OALTC has already initiated. First, was
the reform of various need methodologies. One of the major areas that OALTC has committed to
is changing outdated and restrictive need methodologies, especially in Article 36 and Article 40
hospices. Determining public need is crucial for thoughtful health care planning. However,
determining public need should serve to strengthen and not hinder the establishment of new
facilities and home care services in areas underserved. This must change, and it will. OALTC is
now working on improving and streamlining the need methodologies to reflect our current
ecosystem. OALTC looks forward to working with the Council on important issues and
welcomes feedback and suggestions as we move forward.




                                                13
        Mr. Herbst noted the second is a lifting of the moratorium. The Department recently
released the new licensure application process in mid-August. As a result of this new application
release, we anticipate a steady increase in the number of applications that you will be asked to
review and approve. Again, OALTC looks forward to working with EPRC and the entire
membership as we move forward with increasing access to home and community based services.
This must be done responsibly and in a reasonable manner that ensures high quality health care
for New Yorkers in need of home health services.

        Mr. Herbst stated the third is the critical nursing home quality work. He stated he is fully
aware that for many years you have led the public discussion on the important question of what
nursing home quality should mean. Nursing home operators should be held responsible and
accountable to the residents of New York's nursing homes and the families who entrust their
loved one's care to these providers. The Department is committed to this important issue and
over the next year we'll work to strengthen quality in nursing homes through the New York State
legislative and regulatory processes, the executive budget and also thoughtful policy
development. The Department looks forward to the Council’s support and input. Again, we look
forward to partnering with the Council as we not only look to improve the quality of nursing
homes, but to do so in an efficient and timely manner.

        Mr. Herbst described the fourth area which relates to workforce. The issues of workforce
are a major issue and must be addressed by all health care stakeholders. OALTC has listened to
members ask the fundamental question, How should the Department consider the quality of CON
applications when it comes to workforce considerations, especially when reviewing patient
volume projections? Even if an applicant can meet their expected patient volume projections,
how will these applicants find and retain qualified staff? These are important threshold questions.
They'll be asked to consider by the Department on all CON applications moving forward.
OALTC looks forward to working with you in finding common sense approaches to this crucial
and growing problem.

        Mr. Herbst noted the fifth area is the reform. Earlier this year, you heard from Mr.
Friedman, the former New York state Medicaid Director, as he provided an in-depth presentation
on the structural alternatives for the program of all inclusive care for the elderly, also known as
PACE. OALTC remains committed to working with OHIP and all our external stakeholders and
the Council of reviewing ways to improve the states ability to reform the PACE program to
promote expansion of this innovative model. OALTC is in the process now working towards that
goal by analyzing ways to implement and improve the PACE program. As mentioned at the
presentation, the legislature has passed a bill earlier this year to establish a combined licensure
and surveillance process for the PACE program. OALTC looks forward to keeping you informed
as discussions progress on this legislation. Mr. Herbst stated that the Council will be actively
engaged in any policy discussion and regulations adopted to implement this legislative initiative.




                                                14
        Mr. Herbst explained the sixth area, streamlining the way the Department conducts
business. The Department has heard the concern raised by members, and the Department is
eagerly looking for new ways to address your concerns. Specifically, the members asked how
can the Department streamline processes to ensure that they thoroughly reviewed and consider
the most important matters related to CON and establishment and construction applications and
remove matters of important but at times ministerial implication from your busy and full
agendas. As a follow up to this question. OALTC staff now looking for better ways of reforming
our work in the upcoming cycle, and will have more comments on this with different solutions
very soon and look forward to further conversation with each of you at the upcoming meetings.

         Mr. Herbst advised that OALTC will continue to foster community within this critical
industry and the need to keep all channels of communication open as we build a more
sustainable, integrated system of care. The work ahead of us is certainly expansive and critical
for all aging New Yorkers. Mr. Herbst stated that during the next few weeks, the OALTC team
and himself will reach out to each of the members to discuss ways the Department can improve
upon our work in these areas and get your feedback and ideas.

        Mr. Herbst concluded his report. To see the complete report please see pages 19 through
23 of the transcript.

REGULATION

       Mr. Kraut introduced Mr. Holt to give his Report of the Committee on Codes,
Regulations and Legislation.

Report of the Committee on Codes, Regulation and Legislation

For Emergency Adoption

         20-06 Amendment of Part 2, Section 405.3 and Addition of Section 58-1.14 to
               Title 10 NYCRR (Investigation of Communicable Disease)

         20-07 Addition of Section 2.60 to Title 10 NYCRR (Face Coverings for COVID-19
               Prevention)

         22-21 Amendment of Section 23.1 of Title 10 NYCRR (Monkeypox Virus to the List of
               Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs)

       Mr. Holt introduced for Emergency Adoption of Amendment of Part 2, Section 405.3 and
Addition of Section 58-1.14 to Title 10 NYCRR (Investigation of Communicable Disease) and
motioned for adoption. Dr. Gutiérrez seconded the motion. The motion carried. Please see pages
23 and 24 of the transcript.




                                               15
        Mr. Holt introduced For Emergency Adoption of Addition of Section 2.60 to
Title 10 NYCRR (Face Coverings for COVID-19 Prevention). Mr. Holt motions for approval.
Dr. Gutiérrez seconded the motion. The motion carried. Please see page 24 of the transcript.

         Mr. Holt introduced For Emergency Adoption and noted for the record that the item is on
For Information purposes as well the Amendment of Section 23.1 of Title 10 NYCRR
(Monkeypox Virus to the List of Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs). Mr. Holt motions for
approval. Dr. Gutiérrez seconded the motion. The motion carried. Please see pages 24 and 25
of the transcript.

       Mr. Holt concluded his report. Mr. Kraut thanked Mr. Holt for his report

PROJECT REVIEW RECOMMENDATIONS AND ESTABLISHMENT ACTIONS
       Mr. Kraut introduced Dr. Kalkut to give the Report of the Committee on Establishment
and Project Review.
PROJECT REVIEW RECOMMENDATIONS AND ESTABLISHMENT ACTIONS
     Report of the Committee on Establishment and Project Review
     Gary Kalkut, M.D. Vice Chair, Establishment and Project Review Committee
     A.    APPLICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
   CATEGORY 1:               Applications Recommended for Approval – No Issues or Recusals,
                             Abstentions/Interests

                             NO APPLICATIONS

   CATEGORY 2: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:

         PHHPC Member Recusals
         Without Dissent by HSA
         Without Dissent by Establishment and Project Review Committee

   CON Applications

    Acute Care Services - Construction

             Number                  Applicant/Facility                   Council Action

             221218 C                United Memorial Medical Center       Contingent Approval
                                     (Genesee County)
                                     Mr. Thomas – Recusal



                                               16
    Dr. Kalkut called application 221218 and noted for the record the Mr. Thomas has a conflict
and has exited the meeting room. Dr. Kalkut motioned for approval and Dr. Gutiérrez seconded
the motion. The motion to approve carried with Mr. Thomas’ recusal. Mr. Thomas returned to
the meeting room. Please see page 25 of the transcript.

   CATEGORY 3:               Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:

           No PHHPC Member Recusals
           Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
           Contrary Recommendations by HSA

                             NO APPLICATIONS

   CATEGORY 4: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:

             PHHPC Member Recusals
             Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
             Contrary Recommendation by HSA

                             NO APPLICATIONS

   CATEGORY 5:               Applications Recommended for Disapproval by OHSM or
                             Establishment and Project Review Committee - with or without
                             Recusals

                             NO APPLICATIONS

   CATEGORY 6: Applications for Individual Consideration/Discussion

                             NO APPLICATIONS

     B.     APPLICATIONS FOR ESTABLISHMENT AND CONSTRUCTION OF
            HEALTH CARE FACILITIES

   CATEGORY 1:               Applications Recommended for Approval – No Issues or Recusals,
                             Abstentions/Interests

   CON Applications

    Diagnostic and Treatment Centers – Establish/Construct

              Number                 Applicant/Facility                   Council Action

              221199 B               Yaldeinu Health Inc.                 Contingent Approval
                                     (Kings County)

                                              17
             221212 E                Smile New York Outreach, LLC         Contingent Approval
                                     (Bronx County)

    Certificates

    Certificate of Dissolution

             Applicant                                                    Council Action

             J.G.B. Health Facilities Corporation                         Approval

    Ambulatory Surgery Centers – Establish/Construct

             Number                  Applicant/Facility                   Council Action

             211143 E                AMSC, LLC d/b/a Downtown             Contingent Approval
                                     Bronx, ASC
                                     (Bronx County)

             221095 B                Empire CSS, LLC d/b/a Empire         Contingent Approval
                                     Center for Special Surgery
                                     (Richmond County)

             221224 E                21 Reade Place ASC, LLC d/b/a        Approval
                                     Bridgeview Endoscopy
                                     (Dutchess County)

             221267 E                Advanced Endoscopy LLC d/b/a         Approval
                                     Advanced Endoscopy Center
                                     (Bronx County)
             221270 E                Endoscopy Center of                  Approval
                                     Niagara, LLC
                                     (Niagara County)

             221271 E                Endoscopy Center of Western          Approval
                                     New York, LLC
                                     (Erie County)

             221272 E                Island Digestive Health Center       Approval
                                     (Suffolk County)

       Dr. Kalkut next called applications 221199, 221212, J.G.B. Health Facilities Corporation,
211143, 221095, 221224, 221267, 221270, 221271, and 221272. Dr. Kalkut motioned for
approval. Dr. Gutiérrez seconded the motion. The motion to approve carried. Please see pages
25 and 26 of the attached transcript

                                              18
    CATEGORY 2: Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:
         PHHPC Member Recusals
         Without Dissent by HSA
         Without Dissent by Establishment and Project Review Committee
   CON Applications

    Ambulatory Surgery Centers – Establish/Construct

             Number                   Applicant/Facility                    Council Action

             221268 E                 Carnegie Hill Endoscopy, LLC          Approval
                                      (New York County)
                                      Dr. Lim - Recusal
             221269 E                 East Side Endoscopy, LLC d/b/a        Approval
                                      East Side Endoscopy and Pain
                                      Management Center
                                      (New York County)
                                      Dr. Lim – Recusal
       Dr. Kalkut called applications 221268 and 221269 and noted for the record that Dr. Lim
has declared a conflict of interest and has exited the meeting room. Dr. Kalkut motioned for
approval, Dr. Gutiérrez seconded the motion to approve. The motion to approve carried with
Dr. Lim’s recusal. Dr. Lim returned to the meeting room. Please see pages 26 and 27 of the
attached transcript
    Certified Home Health Agencies – Establish/Construct

             Number                   Applicant/Facility                    Council Action

             221184 E                 Emerest Certified Home Health    Contingent Approval
                                      Care of NY LLC d/b/a Royal Care
                                      Certified Home Health Care of NY
                                      (Bronx County)
       Lastly, Dr. Kalkut called application 221184 and noted for the record that Mr. LaRue has
declared an interest. Dr. Kalkut motioned for approval, Dr. Gutiérrez seconded the motion. The
motion to approve carried. Mr. LaRue clarified for the record that he has declared an interest but
has voted for approval. Please see pages 27 and 28 of the transcript.
CATEGORY 3:           Applications Recommended for Approval with the Following:
         No PHHPC Member Recusals
         Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
         Contrary Recommendations by HSA
                              NO APPLICATIONS
                                               19
  CATEGORY 4:        Applications Recommended for Approval with the following:
           PHHPC Member Recusals
           Establishment and Project Review Committee Dissent, or
           Contrary Recommendation by HSA
                                     NO APPLICATIONS
CATEGORY 5:          Applications Recommended for Disapproval by OHSM or Establishment
                     and Project Review Committee - with or without Recusals
                             NO APPLICATIONS

CATEGORY 6:          Applications for Individual Consideration/Discussion

                             NO APPLICATIONS
       Dr. Kalkut concluded his report.
     B.    Long Term Care Ombudsman Overview

           Claudette Royal, Long Term Care Ombudsman, NYS Office for the Aging

       Mr. Kraut introduced Ms. Royal to give an overview of the Long Term Care Ombudsman
program. To review the complete presentation please see pages 28 through 32 of the transcript.

CLINICAL STAFFING OVERVIEW

        Mr. Kraut next introduced Mr. Hennessy and Ms. Schulman to present an overview of
clinical staffing.

        Mr. Hennessey and Ms. Shulman presented a power point presentation on the laws
pertaining to safe staffing to general hospitals. To read the presentation and the members
comments, please see pages 32 through 38 of the transcript.

ADJOURNMENT:
       Mr. Kraut thanked Mr. Hennessey and Ms. Shulman for their report. He then announced
the upcoming PHHPC meetings and adjourned the public portion of the meeting.




                                             20
                NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
             PUBILC HEALTH AND HEALTH PLANNING COUNCIL
                        FULL COUNCIL MEETING
                       OCTOBER 6, 2022 10:15 AM
            ESP, CONCOURSE LEVEL, MEETING ROOM 6, ALBANY
    90 CHURCH STREET, 4TH FLOOR, CONFERENCE ROOMS 4A AND 4B, NYC
                             TRANSCRIPT


nysdoh_20221006_1_2.mp3

Mr. Kraut I'm now going to call to order the Public Health and Health Planning Council of
October 6th, 2022. As a reminder, I just want to repeat the requirements that we have for
our open meetings. It's a public meeting via the webcast. There's a forum that needs to be
filled out, which records your attendance at this meeting required by the Commission on
Ethics and Lobbying in accordance with Executive Law 166. The form is also posted on
the Department of Health's website under www.NYHealth.Gov under Certificate of Need.
We ask you to email the completed forms to Colleen.Leonard@Health.NY.Gov before the
meeting. Thank you for your cooperation in us complying with this law. We're subject to the
Open Meeting Law. Therefore, we're broadcasting over the internet. Keep yourselves on
mute when not speaking. Avoid the rustling of papers and stuff. It will pick up personal
conversations and chatter we'd like to keep to a minimum. We're doing synchronize
captioning as well, and we need to make sure that no one is speaking over each other. It's
really hard to do the captioning of two people speaking at the same time. The first time you
speak, we'd ask that you identify yourself as a council member or a member of DOH staff.
This will be helpful to us. I want to encourage everybody to sign up on the Department of
Health Certificate of Need Listserv. We regularly send out important council information
and notices as soon as it's available, such as the agenda, the content for the agenda, the
meeting dates and policy matters. All the material presented before the council is available
online for those to review prior to the meeting. There are also printed instructions on the
reference table outside of the meeting rooms on how to join the listserv or just contact
Colleen Leonard at the email I had previously done. Today, we're going to hear from Dr.
Bassett about the Department of Health activities, followed by Dr. Bauer about the Office
of Public Health, followed by Ms. Morne, who's going to give us some insight into her new
appointment as Head of the Office of Health Equity and Human Rights, followed by Dr.
Morley with the Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management. Mr. Herbst will
be filing a report on the Office of Aging and Long Term Care.

Mr. Kraut I'll ask Mr. Holt to present the regulations for emergency adoption of the Codes
Committee.

Mr. Kraut Wait a minute. I think I screwed that up, right?

Mr. Kraut And then what we're going to do after that is we're going to do... Mr. Holt will do
Codes Committee, Mr. Robinson will do Establishment Review. We'll hear from Ms. Royal
from the Office of Aging, who will present the long term care abandonment project. Finally,
Mr. Hennessey and Ms. Shulman will talk about the clinical staff overview.

Mr. Kraut Just before we get to the Establishment Review Committee report, we've
batched the applications, so we would ask everybody to take a look at them, make sure
there's no issue you have on how we batched them. If there is, please make us aware of it
and we'll remove any batched applications.


                                              1
Mr. Kraut I'd like this time to congratulate Ms. Soto, who's recently retired from her
position at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. She has been a dedicated employee
for the past thirty-two years. You've served as the Assistant Dean to the Office of Diversity
Enhancement and Director of the Einstein Enrichment Program. We are very thankful that
Ms.. Soto has agreed to continue to serve out her term on the council. We appreciate it.
We wish you well on the next leg of your professional journey, but we're really pleased it's
including a stop and stay here. Thank you very much, Ms. Soto.

Mr. Kraut I need a motion to adopt the June 2nd, 2022 public health meeting minutes.

Mr. Kraut May I have a motion?

Mr. Kraut Dr. Berliner.

Mr. Kraut A second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Any issues with the minutes?

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries.

Mr. Kraut Now, I needed a motion to adopt the July 28th 2022 meeting minutes.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Berliner.

Mr. Kraut A second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Any issues or corrections?

Mr. Kraut Hearing none, I'll call for a vote.

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries.

Mr. Kraut I need a motion to adopt the September 15th, 2022 special meeting minutes.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion by Dr. Berliner.

Mr. Kraut A second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Any issues with those minutes that were provided to you?



                                                2
Mr. Kraut Hearing none, I'll call for a vote.

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut Motion carries.

Mr. Kraut I'll now turn it over to Albany.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Bassett has joined us.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Bassett, welcome.

Mr. Kraut The microphone is yours.

Dr. Bassett Thank you, Mr. Kraut.

Dr. Bassett Good morning, everyone. It's a real pleasure to be back with you today. I'm
going to give some quick updates first about what we have called the big three here at the
Health Department; that's COVID, polio and monkeypox and then I'll move on to talk about
the prevention agenda, which continues to address the leading causes of death in our
state. As we settle into the Fall and we all are enjoying the beautiful weather with the
morning chill, we want everyone to remember, as Dr. Bauer has reminded us on previous
occasions, that COVID is still very much with us. As of yesterday, we were running close
to 21 cases per 100,000, and we had 2,425 patients hospitalized with COVID yesterday.
We are still losing people to COVID. We had 19 new deaths reported through our
surveillance system yesterday. As you all are aware, we have reduced the restrictions that
we had related to public health measures of masking and distancing. We are relying
increasingly on the protection that vaccines provide. Vaccination is what has changed the
face of COVID and reduced its impact in terms of severity and death. The new Bivalent
booster is here. The shots are available. They will greatly improve our ability to protect
New Yorkers from the rising rates of transmission that we expect to see in Winter months.
We're also expecting to see Pfizer and Moderna approve this new Bivalent vaccine for
emergency use in children, children five and older for the Pfizer vaccine, which has been
really the mainstay of MRNA vaccines or vaccines in general in our state and for children
six and over for Moderna. This is a plea I make every time I have a microphone. I want
everyone who is eligible to get their booster to go out and get their booster and remind you
also that this is flu season upon us. We would like you to get your flu shot as flu cases are
on the rise in the state and at this time, flu transmission in the state is considered
widespread. To get this point across, we're going to be launching a flu COVID vaccine
campaign. We are going to be promoting the Bivalent vaccine through paid medium. That
will include targeted digital advertising, social media and other means. So, that's the news
on COVID. We have a booster that addresses for the first time our leading circulating
variant. That's the BA45 variant. We want everyone who's eligible. That means if you
haven't been vaccinated and haven't had COVID in the last two months, you're eligible for
the Bivalent booster if you're over 12.




                                                3
Dr. Bassett Let me turn now to polio. On July 21st, we announced that a young person
was diagnosed with paralytic polio who was resident in Rockland County. The department
began looking at wastewater, which is a polite word for sewage, because people polio
virus in their guts. We began looking at it in Rockland and other counties to see if we could
detect polio virus in wastewater in these communities. We found evidence of polio virus in
Orange County, Sullivan County, in New York City and Nassau County. This virus has
been sequenced and linked genetically to the person who developed clinical paralytic
polio. This is the evidence that we have for the ongoing circulation. We've continued to
detect virus in wastewater, and we are working hard to address this. The answer is simple
to proclaim, but challenging to execute, and that is vaccination. We're providing
operational and outreach and communications support to these counties, working
collaboratively with their health departments and with other community partners to share
the facts, increase awareness and encourage people to be vaccinated. As you know, the
declaration of an emergency enabled us to expand our pool of vaccinators for polio, an
important part of our response.

Dr. Bassett Let me move on to monkeypox. This was something that was really just an
artifact of medical textbooks. Until mid-May of this year, when we began the current
outbreak of monkeypox, which has spread to involve more than 90 countries and has
involved, I think, where there may be one state that has not had a case diagnosed, but
virtually every state in the United States has diagnosed a person with monkeypox since
mid-May. We have at this time 3,889 cases. That's the latest data as of Tuesday this
week. Almost all of these cases are in New York City and in the Downstate area, meaning
two thirds of the 334 cases diagnosed outside of New York City have been in Long Island
and Westchester. On July 28th, I declared monkeypox an imminent threat to public health,
and that was followed by the Governor's declaration, and it was subsequently followed by
a national act. We have provided clinical guidance for the testing of monkeypox through
initially all public health labs, but now increasingly also private labs. I think about a quarter
of current testing is done by our Wadsworth Lab and the rest is now done by private labs.
And we, of course, are working hard to distribute the vaccine through both federal and
local partners, which you've heard a bit about already. We are encouraged that the rate of
increase of monkeypox cases has really slowed. It appears that we have, you know, sort
of reached a point where certainly the outbreak is no longer growing. This is true in New
York City as well as in the rest of the state. This is the joint action of the affected
community as well as the availability of vaccine. We are continuing to engage communities
and provide information and work with advocates and activists and the LGBTQ community.
We have longstanding relationships with these, principally through our AIDS Institute, but
also through other parts of the department. You will hear more from our Deputy
Commissioner for Health Equity and Human Rights, Joanne Morne, who you may have
already known as the Director of the AIDS Institute. She has already talked with you about
the importance of the act that the council is just taking and designating monkeypox as a
sexually transmitted infection. Just to reiterate, we don't want a sexually active minor.
Regardless of whether parents want their children to be sexually active or whether any
adult wants them to. We know that children report that by the time they finished high
school, half have engaged in sexual activity. If you are a young boy engaging in sex with
men or boys, we want you to have the right to protect yourself. You have just enabled that.
This is simply about access and the protection of our youth.

Dr. Bassett With those words, I'll go on to say a bit about the Prevention Agenda. We are
on a five year, I think it's five years anyway. It's 2019 to 2024. A plan of the Prevention
Agenda, which calls on cross-sector partnerships to address the facts of everyday life that
we refer to as social determinants of health that enhance the burden of disease. There are



                                               4
five priority areas for specific action. Most of this work is overseen by our Office of Public
Health. I'll ask Dr. Bauer to also join me in answering questions about it, if there are some.
Let me just go over for you the priority areas. They include the prevention of chronic
disease, the promotion of a healthy and safe environment, the promotion of health for
women, infants and children, the promotion of well-being and the prevention of mental
health and substance use disorders. And, of course, the prevention of communicable
diseases, a task that has occupied most of my tenure. The prevention agenda provides
communities with recommended evidence based interventions and information on
promising practices and guidance, and that emphasizes interventions that don't place
blame on individuals for unhealthy patterns, but addresses the need for healthy
environments that promote healthy choices and the need for equity across communities.
There are action plans around all of these priority areas that are broken down into focus
areas, goals and objectives. We're committed to tracking progress with measures that
reflect the implementation and impact of evidence based interventions. These are all
tracked in the prevention agendas dashboard, which can show progress or challenges. As
you might imagine, the COVID pandemic posed a substantial challenge to the prevention
agenda. I'm very pleased to be talking with you about it as we readdress these important
causes of health. I'm going to go through each of these categories. The first one, as you'll
recall, was preventing chronic disease. We have seen an improvement in the proportion of
adults over 50 who've had a colorectal screen. It went from 66.3% to 91. Sorry, I
misspoke. I wish it were 91, but it went from 66.3% to 71.8% in one year. There has been
progress in asthma management with asthma related emergency departments in the
pediatric age group, and that's people under 18. Fell from 138 in 2016 to 100 in 2019.
Medicaid managed care members identified with persistent asthma and given the right
medications for their asthma management. It has been rising steadily. It was just at 50% in
2014 and had risen to 60% in 2019. Obviously that's progress, but hardly perfect. We want
to see that proportion continue to go up. Obesity is a stunning challenge to the health of
our nation and our state. The obesity rate in children which had leveled and begun to drop
until 2015 has now started to inch up again. We estimate that 13.9% of children, 2 to 4
years old who are in the WIC program are obese. Obesity begins very early. Also
important is smoking cessation. We have been helping smokers to quit. With smokers
enrolled in Medicaid, the proportion dropping from 24.3% to 19.9% in one year.
Additionally, we track blood pressure. I mean, sorry. Blood sugar elevations as a measure
of diabetes in the population. We're hopeful that we're doing better at managing people
with diabetes. Blood sugar elevations have fallen between 2019 and 2020. They fell from
69.2% to 60.4%. That was quite a big drop for just one year. The next objective is to
promote a healthy and safe environment. That's seen a lot of improvements across all
categories. Crash related pedestrian fatalities rose however. I'm going to tell you the bad
news. That's how we work in public health. We own up to our challenges. Crash related
pedestrian fatalities rose from 1.3 to 1.9 per 100,000. The annual number of days that the
air quality was above 100, which is unhealthy. That number of days has increased. It was
12 in 2020. It went up to 20 days in 2021. We had hoped to achieve a level of three days
by 2024, but at this time our confidence in achieving that is waning. There has, as I've
said, been progress. The percent of people living in a certified climate smart community
has doubled from 15.1% to 31.3%. That's between 2019 and 2021. The number of homes
inspected for lead and other health hazards, as well as homes tested and mitigated for
radon, has significantly improved, and public water systems that were awarded
infrastructure improvement assistance has doubled from 28 public water systems to 56.
The third objective, promoting healthy women, infants and children. Most of our focus
areas, there have been declines, not improvements. We're all very well aware of the rising
tide of opioid use, including fatal overdoses and the number of newborns born with
neonatal withdrawal symptoms per 1,000 live births has improved in spite of that from 9.6



                                              5
to 7.9. That's between 2018 and 2019. I hope our more recent data will confirm that.
Additionally, we're getting more participation in the early intervention program where we,
the proportion of families who meet the state standard for impact on family scale has
improved from 67% to 93.9% in 2020. That was the good news. Newborns with neonatal
withdrawal and improvements in delivery of services in the early intervention program.
There is less rosy news in the maternal mortality rate. That rate rose from 18.1 in 2016 to
19.3 in 2019. The disparity in Black and white maternal death rates also widened. The
ratio grew from 4.68 in 2014 to 5.31 in 2019. We also saw a reversal of progress in the
proportion of births that are preterm from the lowest level in 2015, which was 8.7%, which
was pretty close to the prevention agenda goal of 8.3%. We have instead seen a rise from
8.7% to 9.2% in 2019. The percentage of women who talk with a healthcare provider about
ways to prepare for a healthy pregnancy fell from 43% to 35%. Suicide, and this is a
national observation, has been rising in youth with deaths rising from 4.6 per 100,000 to
6.2. Mental health and substance use disorders are, and many of the focus areas under
this pillar showed improvement, despite the fact that we are all aware that people's mental
health has truly been challenged in recent years. These data come from before COVID
that the proportion of adolescents with major depressive episodes grew from 10.8% in
2018 to 12.9%. There were these improvements. Binge drinking in young adults improved.
People who got at least one buprenorphine prescription for opioid use disorder improved.
Emergency department visits for any opioid overdose improved slightly. Indicated reports
of child abuse and new maltreatment fell. The last category is about communicable
diseases, and you all know that we have been heavily focused on COVID, on polio and on
monkeypox, but there are other communicable diseases which we concern ourselves with,
and in this case, sexually transmitted infections, old infections of gonorrhea. I mean, these
ones we've known of for many, many years. Gonorrhea, chlamydia and syphilis are going
up and our immunization rate in children has declined. There has been some progress.
For example, the immunization of adolescents for HPV, the principal risk factor for a
number of common cancers, including among girls, cervical cancer. That proportion rose
from 28 to 30, nearly 40% in 2020. The number of newly diagnosed HIV cases declined
between 2010 and 2019. I spend some time on all of these issues just to remind all of us
of the scope of work of the health department. We are very much committed to the whole
health of the population, which extends beyond the control of microbes to include the
environment, non-communicable and chronic disease. I very much look forward to our
continued progress on COVID. That's why I want everyone who is eligible for a booster to
get boosted, so that we can turn to these and direct department attention to these long
standing challenges to the health of our population.

Dr. Bassett With that, I'd be happy to answer any questions and I'll conclude my remarks.

Mr. Kraut Thank you. Thank you very much, Commissioner, for that extensive report.

Mr. Kraut This is the Ask Commissioner part of the council meeting.

Mr. Kraut Any council members here or in Albany have any questions?

Mr. Kraut I'll turn it over to Dr. Boufford first.

Dr. Boufford Thank you very much. I want to thank you for bringing up and reminding us
about the prevention agenda. I really very much value the ongoing work of the department
in the face of the acute challenges that you've had. I know this council and the Public
Health Committee of the Council have been quite eager to restart, if you will, our sort of
ongoing conversations on the prevention agenda, as well as the issue of maternal



                                                     6
mortality, which had been an early concern of the council. In fact, I think as long as 4 to 5
years ago had sort of generated paper that has led to the Governor's commission and
much of the other activity that's going on. I just want to thank you for raising that again. We
look forward to working with you to put these other elements back on the public health
agenda.

Mr. Kraut Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Any other questions?

Mr. Kraut Dr. Kalkut.

Dr. Kalkut Thanks again for the report, covering a whole spectrum of problems that we
face. I had a question about COVID and the CDC mask suggestions or recommendations
that were from a couple of weeks ago, which allowed facilities to in non-high transmission
areas to change masking requirements right now. Dp you anticipate the state weighing in
on that or commenting on that announcement from the CDC?

Dr. Bassett Yes.

Dr. Bassett Thanks.

Dr. Kalkut Is that a problem?

Dr. Bassett I think of the principal location where we have continued to require masking;
our health care facilities, which include nursing homes. We have continued that as a
universal requirement, not only in patient facing areas, but throughout the facility. I don't
know if you've had a chance to look recently at the map on transmission. You have to look
for it because if you Google, you know, COVID levels, you'll end up with a different map,
which shows what the CDC now calls community levels, which measures basically
hospitalizations and hospital capacity as the principal sort of determinants of what the level
will be after cases past a certain point. If you look at the transmission map, the last time I
looked at that, which was a couple of days ago there updated actually today. We can all
look at it today. The map on transmission was still all red, meaning that we as a state
continue to be in the highest level of transmission. We're going to hold on to masking in
settings which has elderly people who are, of course, our most vulnerable, the people who
are getting infected, getting hospitalized and dying are principally people over the age of
65 during our current period. We really want to be very careful. I hope that that answers
your question. We continue to meet the CDC guidance. I don't expect that that will change
or that we will drop masks in health care settings. We no longer have masks required in
schools, public indoor places, transport, except for the individuals who choose to wear
them. I hope that we'll all work to try and reduce the amount of stigma that is attached to
mask wearing. I have had the experience personally on numbers of occasion of entering
the hall where I'm the only person present who is wearing a mask. I hope that we can get
to the point where, you know, where that person and in this case, that person was me,
doesn't feel like we've possibly done something wrong. Everybody should take the action
that they need to protect themselves. In hospital settings, we are going to continue. People
don't choose to end up in the hospital. We're going to continue to maintain the protection
of masks. In this case, we are fully consistent with CDC guidance.

Dr. Kalkut The map is as red as it was a few days ago for New York State. The CDC
comments that three quarters of the counties in the United States are still considered high



                                              7
transmission rates. It's a small part that would even consider these regs following it
directly.

Dr. Kalkut Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Any other members of the council?

Mr. Kraut Anybody in Albany?

Mr. Kraut Commissioner, thank you so much for the report. We look forward to our next
visit.

Mr. Kraut I want to introduce Ms. Morne, who's going to give a report on the activities of
the Office of Health Equity and Human Rights.

Ms. Morne Good morning. Thank you again. As said, my name is Johanne Morne. I am
the Deputy Commissioner of the newly created Office of Health Equity and Human Rights
within the Department of Health. I'm proud to lead this effort as well as this team. The
department's reorganization has created a step towards the department's goal of
increasing diversity, equity and inclusion within our workforce as a part of the overarching
mission to build a healthier, more equitable New York State. While critical milestones have
been achieved by the department, we know that we must continue to prioritize our
response to the persistent, glaring disparities, so gains are realized equitably by all
populations. No matter what progress has been made in the department, we cannot
achieve our goals to improve health outcomes if some communities remain left behind.
The Office of Health Equity and Human Rights is charged with working across the
department to address health disparities, as well as to reduce those disparities across
racial, ethnic and socioeconomic groups while leveraging data to inform policy and
improve overall health outcomes. In brief, the goal is to improve health equity, reduce
health disparities, and better support marginalized and underserved communities. The
office is currently made up of three established offices within the department that includes;
the AIDS Institute, the Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities Prevention, as well
as the Office of Gun Violence Prevention. Additionally, we are in the process of building an
additional office, the Office of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion. Collectively, these offices
have a broad portfolio. The AIDS Institute oversees services related to HIV, AIDS, STI's
and Hepatitis C. The AIDS Institute also houses the Office of Drug User Health that works
towards the health and wellness of individuals who use drugs, as well as supports the
LGBTQ Health and Human Services Network. The Office of Minority Health and Health
Disparities Prevention works to ensure that all New Yorkers have access to health care
services and other support services with an overarching objective to ensure that
marginalized communities are prioritized in the efforts that we make to achieve health for
all. The Office of Gun Violence Prevention, newly established about a year and a half ago,
was developed to focus on the public health impact of gun violence within a number of
vulnerable communities across our state. Community engagement is the foundation of the
work that we do across the department and certainly within this office through close
allyship with community partners and stakeholders. It is our intention to build on the
historic advancements that have been made as it relates to the work that cuts across
equity, health care access, promotion of anti-stigma and certainly anti-racist structure as
well as the preservation of human rights. We've set a number of ambitious goals for this
office to achieve by the end of the year. I'll offer just a few examples, including the
establishment of three working groups that will help to inform DOH planning, multiple state
agency planning and community stakeholder priority setting. We'll be working to initiate the



                                              8
development of the New York State Department of Health, Health Equity and Human
Rights Blueprint in an effort to offer a universal set of goals and objectives. We will also be
working to develop and facilitate Department of Health staff training related to diversity,
equity and inclusion. Many of us are already at the table working to establish a department
wide definition of health equity as well as health disparities. We will continue to do the
work regarding data modernization. On behalf of the entire team that already has done
tremendous work within this office, we look forward to our continued work ahead. We are
absolutely committed to working towards the goal of achieving sustainable change, the
process of making sustainable improvements that will last over time.

Ms. Morne Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Thank you very much.

Mr. Kraut Is there any comments or questions?

Mr. Kraut Dr. Boufford.

Dr. Boufford Again, just to welcome you, Commissioner Morne.

Dr. Boufford Excuse me.

Dr. Boufford To say how important it is for your arrival and consolidating the number of
the areas that have been looking at the issue of vulnerable populations and diversity,
equity and inclusion. This has been a a gap in the work on the prevention agenda that
many of the local communities who are charged to identify two of the five goals in their
action planning going forward, in addition to one area of health disparity to work on in their
communities. Many of them have requested technical assistance support and other help in
this area. I'll be coming to you to talk to you about that very quickly. I think it's very
encouraging. We look forward to working with you on the further development of this area
of the prevention agenda.

Ms. Morne Thank you very much.

Mr. Kraut I'll just put in my $0.02 since you kind of went through it. It's a passion of mine.
You talked about the importance of getting data and using that data. In probably no other
policy agenda will good data drive good policy. I implore you to work with your colleagues
to get the most important database that we have that has not been available to providers
and researchers and people that are interested in this is the all claims database. The only
database the state has that we can actually visualize a journey and where people seek
care and where they have problems accessing care. I would hope that your group would
have some influence on getting that data into the public domain, so we could start using it
for the types of objectives that you raised. I'm not asking you to respond. I'm just making
another plea to another person maybe that might be able to do something about it.

Mr. Kraut Mr. Lawrence.

Mr. Lawrence Harvey Lawrence, a member of the council. Commissioner Morne, I'd like
to commend you because this is a pretty ambitious agenda that you've established.
Working at a community health center, we see disparities, especially related to chronic
disease, many of which have existed in our neighborhoods for decades. We've had all
types of approaches to address them, but none seem to really be able to get out in front



                                               9
and make meaningful changes in the lives of the people that we serve. Beyond the broad
policy goals and objectives, I think the real measure of success is whether we reduce
obesity, we reduce hypertension, whether we reduce diabetes, rates of cancer. In
Brooklyn, we have probably the highest rate of prostate cancer. That has persisted for a
while. I welcome this opportunity, but I also know that at some level you got to cut through
some of the policy and really look to how do you make meaningful change in the system
that results in meaningful improvements in the lives of people in many of the
neighborhoods that are served by community health centers around the state. I just
needed to welcome you, because this is something that at the State Association of
Community Health Centers we've been looking at and working about, talking about and
strategizing around how do we, in fact, move the needle in a pretty dramatic way to
improving outcomes?

Mr. Kraut Thank you.

Mr. Kraut I'm just going to ask if we could wait a moment. We have a technical problem
which we need to resolve. I'll come back to Ms. Soto next for a question. We have a
problem where we're not being visible on Zoom. The folks in this room. Is that correct?

Mr. Kraut In Albany.

Mr. Kraut They can't see us. They blacked out over here. We're permanently black. They
need to reset the system. They just asked us to pause for a minute until we can do so.

nysdoh_20221006_1_3.mp3
Ms. Soto I'm the past Chair for the New York State Minority Health Council. One of the
things that I was listening and I honed in on that we are looking at not only diversity and
inclusion, but that key equity piece, because we have, over the years New York State has
worked at identifying and increasing. As you pointed out, and we continue to have
marginalized communities, individuals in terms of access. I was pleased to hear that it's
not only going to be diversity inclusion, but the issue of equity.

Ms. Morne Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Any other questions?

Mr. Kraut Well, we're obviously, you know, as part of the prevention agenda, as Dr.
Boufford said, and the issues Ms. Soto just brought up. We're looking forward to working
with you and for other times to come here and work with our committees and to advance
your agenda, which is 100% aligned with what we want to do. We want to spend more
time on things that have higher value for the state with respect to public health and health
equity. I think you'll have a great partner in this council. We wish you well.

Ms. Morne Thank you very much.

Mr. Kraut Thank you.

Ms. Morne I look forward to our work together.

Mr. Kraut Thank you.




                                             10
Mr. Kraut I'll now turn to Dr. Bauer to give her report on the activities of public health.
Again, I apologize for skipping over you.

Dr. Bauer Thanks so much.

Dr. Bauer Good afternoon. Ursula Bauer, Deputy Commissioner for Public Health. Thank
you for this opportunity. As Dr. Bassett noted, we've been working hard to address our
multiple public health emergencies to include the on going COVID response and our
continuing efforts to slow or even stop the spread of MPV, monkey pox and polio along
with all of our usual responses. In addition to our unprecedented emergency responses,
we're also working hard to rebuild the Department and the Office of Public Health. We
need to rebuild from the disruption we experienced during COVID when greater numbers
of staff retired or left the department, standard operating procedures sometimes fell by the
wayside, and expectations of that 24/7 work cycle exhausted staff and reduced morale.
These issues continue to affect the department and the office. We also need to rebuild
from a decade of declining resources prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning with that
hiring freeze back in 2008 that was lifted in 2021 and regular budget cuts to the
department throughout the twenty teens. These left the department in a weakened
condition even before the pandemic arrived. Today, I'll focus my report on OPH's
rebuilding efforts. It's through progress toward rebuilding that we improve our capacity for
our emergency response and regain our ability to wholly focus on our public health
priorities. As you've heard previously, the department underwent a modest restructuring
back in August and adopted eight strategic priorities to guide our work over the next three
years. These strategic priorities don't replace our current efforts, but rather build on them
and provide a frame from which to guide our progress. Aspects of the restructuring that
affect OPH our rebuild efforts in addition to the exciting new offices that have been created
include the location of the regional offices within the Office of Public Health, the transition
of our Office of Emergency Preparedness to the Executive Deputy Commissioner. And
then, as you heard from Deputy Commissioner Morne and the transition of the AIDS
Institute and Office of Gun Violence Prevention to the new Office of Health Equity and
Human Rights. The strategic priorities of particular relevance to the rebuild effort are
making DOH a great place to work, making DOH an impactful, collaborative and efficient
organization, preparing for the next emergency and strengthening the relationship between
the department and the local health departments. OPH's rebuild efforts are focused on
hiring staff as a top priority, and we've onboarded hundreds of staff in the past year. The
progress is slow, however, because the hiring process is slow and we're not in a great
hiring environment and because many new hires come from within the ranks of the
department, which is great because we're promoting people and giving people new
opportunities. Of course, we're also creating another vacancy that needs to be filled. Even
as we do all this hiring, more people retire or leave the department for other opportunities.
Regaining our full strength will take years and this work is underway. I'm thrilled to
welcome the regional offices to the Office of Public Health. The regional offices are critical
to the department's ability to reach into communities, to support the local health
departments, and to restore the trust that was shaken during COVID. The regional offices
themselves are somewhat fragile structures, though, with no funding stream of their own
and dependent on programs for their staff. Many regional office staff, like many OPH staff
are grant funded, so they lack the flexibility to address core or emerging public health
needs that fall outside their particular scope. We need to develop an operating model for
the regional offices that ensures that basic structure to each, a basic complement of staff,
and a robust ability to engage in communities and provide strategic resources to the local
health departments. This work is underway. The success and impact of our public health
work is dependent upon the success and impact of our local health departments, like the



                                               11
Office of Public Health and the department overall, LHD's were hard hit by the COVID
pandemic response. Losing staff and having difficulty hiring slowed by cumbersome
bureaucratic processes. These have plagued all of us in our public health endeavors. In
addition, the COVID response severely stressed the relationship between the department
and the local health departments. We're working hard to rebuild and strengthen those
relationships. We've partnered to re-establish biweekly leadership meetings with the
steering committee and biweekly meetings with the full membership. We've also instituted
a quarterly meetings with Dr. Bassett and the local health departments. I understand she's
the first commissioner to hold quarterly meetings with the local health departments. In
June, we completed more than twenty focus groups with local health department and DOH
leaders to identify best practices from our COVID response that we can institutionalize in
our partnership going forward. We're wrapping up now a set of six workshops to establish
group norms and supporting behaviors to help OPH and the local health departments
solve problems together. Our rebuild efforts underway also include improving our critical
information technology infrastructure and data systems, finalizing plans for the new
Wadsworth Center Public Health Laboratory Building and preparing scores of budget
proposals to address our long standing and new needs to restore our strength and develop
new capabilities and programs. Much of this rebuild effort will be aided by a new grant
from the CDC that we expect to receive notice on this month called the Strengthening
Public Health Workforce Foundational Capabilities and Data Systems Grant. We applied
for about 135 Million over five years, with the bulk of those funds dedicated to workforce
and frontloaded in year one of the grant. Funding will address longstanding and new
challenges to New York's public health infrastructure. OPH proposes to make strategic
investments in all three of those areas focusing on workforce with more than eighty new
positions proposed. While the grant addresses overall public health capacity, CDC expects
us to focus on communities that have been economically or socially marginalized, are
located in rural geographic areas or are composed of people from racial or ethnic
minorities, or those disproportionately affected by by COVID-19 or other public health
priorities. Specifically, we will deploy these funds, these grant funds to rebuild our Office of
Public Health by creating and filling new positions, by expanding environmental health,
emergency preparedness and public health laboratory capacity, and by improving the
availability and use of workforce wellness opportunities that was another focus of the
funding opportunity. We'll strengthen the regional office infrastructure, including new staff
positions to expand community engagement activities and re-establish a freestanding
regional office to serve the seventeen counties in the Capital District. We'll strengthen
relationships with our local health departments through direct provision of funding to local
health departments to hire or retain staff or invest in other public health essentials.
Collaborations with local health departments to identify and deploy solutions to public
health problems. Ongoing and regular communication with our local health departments to
foster that strong partnership. We'll enhance and expand public health training for local
health department and OPH staff through the establishment of partnerships and training
units within our office, with a focus on public health essentials, understanding and
addressing root causes of health inequities and building community engagement to
empower, support and transform communities. We'll establish a multidisciplinary Health,
Wealth and Wellbeing Unit for the purpose of exploring health and non-health data,
identifying innovative cross-sector solutions and empowering communities to address
foundational causes of health inequities. Finally, we hope to have resources to advance
and align with the work of our data modernization initiative that's currently underway as
part of our epidemiology and laboratory capacity grant. Anticipated outcomes over the five
year project period include increased hiring of diverse staff, improved organizational
processes and systems and progress toward a more modern and efficient data
infrastructure. These will lead in the longer term to a stronger and better equipped public



                                              12
health workforce and expanded and stronger capacity to address longstanding and
emerging public health challenges and increased availability and effective use of public
health and other data to drive program policy and other decision making. Eventually, if
sustained, this program of work will result in improved public health outcomes, including
reductions in health disparities and inequities. The grant is well-timed to align with the
prevention agenda cycle. As you know, the 2022-2024 Community Health Assessment
and Community Health Improvement plans are due at the end of the year. Planning for the
2025 to 2030 cycle is due to get underway early next year. This will be my first
engagement with the prevention agenda planning process since I joined the department
about a year ago. I'm optimistic that with our progress on the rebuild efforts and a more
manageable emergency response demands, we and our local health department and
nonprofit hospital partners will be able to make the next six year cycle particularly effective
and impactful for New York's communities.

Dr. Bauer Thank you.

Mr. Kraut What an agenda you've just laid out. We wish you well. We're here as a
dependable partner. One of the things, obviously, we've all had to focus on the urgent,
sometimes displacing the important and the work that we'd like to return to that's aligned
and frankly, integral to some of the objectives you spoke about is the work of our public
health committee and focusing on the prevention agenda along with our planning
committee. What's the most critical need that we have now is to restart and align our
committees agenda with that of the department and to ensure that the department
provides the resources to that committee to begin its work. We're going to look forward to
that. I know Dr. Boufford has plans to schedule some of those meetings, and we expect to
resume the work in earnest in the weeks and months ahead. I really do thank you. I think
we're just, I think, delighted with the ideas and objectives that you've laid out.

Mr. Kraut Is there any other questions?

Mr. Kraut I'll got Dr. Boufford and then Dr. Gutierrez.

Dr. Boufford Thanks, Dr. Bauer.

Dr. Boufford Obviously, you know that how encouraging it is to hear what you're saying.
As Jeff said, I just to reinforce what he said. I think the other piece that's really important in
the discussion you have opened is the potential links for public health prevention agenda
related social determinants of health activity in relation to the new waiver. That's I guess
the latest version has gone in. It is pending at this point. I think discussions, you know, with
the Office of Planning, with the Medicaid office and others relative to the important
potential for improving conditions in communities along with the health care agenda in the
waiver is something that I hope we can also take up.

Dr. Boufford Thank you for that.

Dr. Bauer Thanks very much, Dr. Boufford.

Dr. Bauer I'll just say it's a real priority of Dr. Bassett to leverage the health care side and
the public health side of the department and ensure that we're working together. We've
had those discussions in her Cabinet meetings and really look forward to leveraging the
resources and talent on the council to make that happen.




                                               13
Dr. Bauer Thank you.

Dr. Gutierrez Thank you, Dr. Bauer.

Dr. Gutierrez I have over five decades of involvement with medicine, and I want to make a
remark that Dr. Boufford has heard me made before. I find that as a community have very
short memories. We don't remember. We don't realize that many of us are here today
because of public health. Forgotten the advancements in longevity brought by public
health. We find ourselves defending what we do when in fact, I feel that we ought to be
celebrating what we have achieved at the same time that we tell people that in order to
defeat a disease, we need to do certain things that cannot be avoided. As a medical
student, I saw polio aplenty. I saw smallpox. I saw listeria. I saw typhoid fever. Those
things were keeping infectious disease hospitals full all the time. We don't see that
anymore. My children know about it because I talk to them about it. My granddaughters
know nothing about this. They wonder why we have to worry about polio. They wonder
why we have to worry about measles. Educating the public, I believe, ought to be a duty of
the health department. I'm making this remark once again, because I would like to see
some part of the health forum dedicated to education beginning at the school level.

Dr. Gutierrez Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Thank you so much.

Mr. Kraut Ms. Monroe.

Ms. Monroe Thank you, Dr. Bauer.

Ms. Monroe This was very exciting. You said you asked for 135 Million from the federal
government. Did you get it all?

Mr. Kraut I think you applied.

Dr. Bauer That's what we applied for. It's over five years. We will hear this month what our
funding amount is.

Ms. Monroe You don't know yet if you're getting any of it or are you...I'm just wondering
where you are in the process of the things you talked about.

Dr. Bauer We submitted our application on August 15th. We are quite confident that we
will receive an award. I anticipate every health department will receive an award. The
question will be what the amount of that award is. CDC had a very complicated three page
funding calculation. They put us through a lot of work to come up with the amount that we
could apply for. I anticipate they will fund us fairly close to that amount.

Ms. Monroe I just want to be sure that some of the agenda that you laid out is achievable,
even if we don't get the full amount. We'll be looking forward to hearing that from you.

Mr. Kraut We'll see where we're permitted to help. Just echoing, you know, what you're
basically saying, what Dr. Bauer said, and particularly the cogent comments of Dr.
Gutierrez. Next year is the 110th year of the Public Health Council in New York State.
We're the steward of a mission that has gone unbroken and met tremendous challenges
over the past hundred and ten years. I think it's exciting of some of the direction that Dr.



                                              14
Bassett, Dr. Bauer, Ms. Morne has laid out. That's not to negate Dr. Morley and Mr. Herbst
who's following them. I just thought I'd take this opportunity to say this is a good time to
reset the priorities of the council and focus on what can make the maximum impact on the
health of all New Yorkers.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Bauer, I thank you so much. I appreciate you. Obviously stimulated a lot of
conversation.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Morley, we'd love to hear from you on the Office of Primary Care and Health
Systems Management.

Dr. Morley Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

Dr. Morley My report will be a little briefer than in the past. I'll start out with four acute care
hospitals and two long term care nursing homes in Western New York notified us, the
department, that a strike vote had taken place in mid September, raising some significant
concerns and a great deal of effort came into the department to work in support as this
was developing. We're happy to report that a tentative agreement has been signed by the
two unions, Communication Workers of America and 1199. That needs to be ratified and
will be ratified, we hope, in mid-October. Survey Activity OPCHSM has conducted thirty-
one surveys of hospitals end stage renal disease providers over the month of August.
That's the most recent reporting month. Electronic survey update. The department
continues its five days a week collection of data from hospitals regarding COVID, its
activity and capacity. We've seen a growing trend of COVID hospitalizations, unfortunately,
and you've heard that. We also conducted a one time survey looking at obstetrics services
in the state. We're reviewing that data right now. The Safe Nurse Staffing Act that was
passed a year ago. We've been working intensely on the committees that have come out
of that statute. Additional information on this statute will be provided towards the end of the
meeting. The Bureau of Emergency Medical Services. On September the 20th, the
department's Bureau of EMS and State Trauma Systems convened families, friends and
colleagues to honor members of the EMS community who had passed in the line of duty.
Ten heroes names were added to the Tree of Life in Albany. The State Emergency
Medical Advisory Council meeting took place. There was extensive discussion about the
increasing volume of extended offload delays in hospital ER's around the state. The state
EMS Council leadership has raised this issue to the attention of the department, and
additional response will be forthcoming. The Bureau of Narcotic Enforcement. The drug
takeback program continues to roll out statewide, with collection receptacles now available
in over 1,300 pharmacies so far to which New Yorkers have returned 19,000 pounds of
pharmaceutical waste. Additional pharmacies are offering collection receptacles and
mailed back envelopes by the day. The Center for Health Care Policy. The 2023
legislature elected the New York State budget includes an appropriation for 2.5 Million for
the Nurses Across New York program that will provide loan repayment for registered
nurses and licensed practical nurses who make an obligation to work for three years in an
underserved area. The legislation includes a provision that the Department of Health shall
appoint a stakeholder work group to develop recommendations and to implement any
nanny recommendations by September. The work group is comprised of associations
representing nurses, general hospitals, long term care and other health care facilities and
includes representatives from twenty organizations. The work group met in July, August
and September and developed recommendations. A report has been forwarded to the
Governor's office. The definition of underserved areas, award amounts and hardships may
need to be considered if a nurse cannot fulfill the three year obligation. We're currently
drafting a solicitation of interest and hope to have it finalized by the end of November and



                                                15
out for public consumption. In response to concerns that have been raised in the past
sessions related to primary care in the pandemic and public health emergencies, I'd like to
thank our policy office folks for helping to construct the response to the committee related
to primary care and the pandemic. The Article 28 of the Public Health Law gives the
Department direct regulatory oversight over hospitals, including general hospitals,
residential health care facilities and diagnostic and treatment centers, including many but
not all of FQHC's. There is not a similar corresponding article within public health that
pertains to private medical practices. As such, the department are statutorily limited in their
response to implement surge and flex operations at settings outside of Article 28
institutions. In addition to the legal limitations, state resources would be necessary to
monitor the implementation of surge and flex operations and to assist in operations such
as helping to divert patients. Based on the department's past experience in employing
surge and flex operations, the department believes in an estate disaster emergency that
impacts the health care delivery system. Focusing surgeon flex operations in acute care
settings most efficiently uses such limited resources. Nevertheless, the amendments to
Title 10 of the New York Codes and Rules and Regulations Surge and Flex Care
Coordination System are not specific to general hospitals, but do cover regulated, quote,
health care facilities, end quote. Accordingly, if resources allow and the public health
emergency demands it, the Commissioner would have discretion to implement surge and
flex operations in DNTC's, including those of FQHC's that fall under Article 28. Finally, I
should note that regulations are identical to the Emergency Surge and Flex regulations
were published in the State Register as a proposed regulation. The public comment period
closed on Article 28. There weren't any comments related to Surge and Flex outside of
Article 28 facilities in those comments.

Dr. Morley That's my report, Mr. Chairman.

Dr. Morley If you've got any questions, I'd be happy to take them.

Dr. Morley Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Thanks so much, Dr. Morley.

Mr. Kraut I'll open up the questions.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Berliner first, then Dr. Boufford.

Dr. Berliner Thank you, Dr. Morley.

Dr. Morley I'm struggling to hear you.

Dr. Berliner Can we get a report on the status of freestanding emergency rooms around
the state?

Dr. Morley We can and we would be willing to talk to you offline just to collect more idea of
what it is you're looking for. Is it just a number or more than that?

Mr. Kraut When we approved the development of freestanding emergency departments
through CON, when they had a requirement to file an annual report and we laid out the
data that they were required to report back to us. Our understanding is everybody has filed
those reports and they just need to be kind of coalesced into this is our impression of what
has happened and what the benefits and what are the challenges. I think we'll take it



                                              16
offline, but a lot of the work has supposedly been done already by applicants, but not
necessarily has it been reported back to us. We'll follow that up with you.

Mr. Kraut Now, we'll turn it to Dr. Boufford.

Dr. Boufford Thanks. Dr. Morley.

Dr. Boufford I appreciate your responding to our expressed concern several times about
the failure to include broader primary care providers and local health departments in this
sort of response, initial response to COVID and in surge and flex regulations that were
promulgated which largely really focused on acute care hospitals. I appreciate the legal
constraints that you lay out, and that's very helpful to know. It's very important to know. I
think the primary concern, which I still have, is that the primary care providers that you
legally, let's say that way, legally have authority over as well as local health departments.
Really, there has been no vehicle for engaging them in conversation around the
preparation for a regular vehicle. Let's talk about the rebuild. The revision of the COVID
response. That remains the problem from what we know from what we've been told. I
would say that you've certainly helped explain the limitations in the surge and flex
regulations up to now. Now, with that understood, I think it would be really important to
think about how there might be a convening to begin to look at the implications of the
current surge and flex for community health centres and local health departments that do
come under the auspices because the issue was people feeling they could have done
more. This council put together a paper about two years ago with a number of sessions
sort of laying out the thinking about that. Very much wish to be more helpful and more
directly involved in future response to future pandemics. I think that's pretty hard to do
unless you're prepared for that. The current surge and flex does a really great job of
sending signals and preparing the acute hospital industry and their links for the next round,
but not addressing the primary care and the local health department participation and the
way that we had envisioned. I just want to say that. I hope we can continue getting
something going in that space. The second thing I wanted to ask that I had mentioned this,
I think at the last council meeting. If we can't do it today, because I know we have a lot of
reports, but certainly for the next time. I think we had been interested in knowing what the
current language was that linked the prevention agenda to the CON process for acute
hospitals. The council had been on the record before COVID, really wanting to see that
and wanting to see conversations about the extension of that, of linking to the prevention
agenda, to certificates of need. As you pointed out, there are some limits to that. Again,
moving beyond acute care hospitals and in view of the fact that for the last couple of
rounds, there have been some hospitals that have really indicated they've not made any
participation in the prevention agenda in their application and others indicating they've not
invested in that process. Again, may I ask the next time we hear about that. I'd love to
perhaps have some thoughts from you all about how do we moving forward involve other
than the acute hospitals in planning for the next surge and flex or the next epidemic now
rather than scrambling at the last minute.

Dr. Boufford Thank you.

Dr. Morley We're certainly more than interested in continuing the discussion, in the
dialogue as to what else can be done. I have to apologize. I'm embarrassed. I was
provided information that I didn't include in this report. It was an oversight on my part. It
was to include the questions that were asked in the CON as it relates to that agenda. I
promise you we will have it in the next report. You know that this is something that we're
interested in continuing the dialogue on. You also heard you mentioned local health



                                                17
departments. Dr. Bauer on the public health side has got that up and running full bore. The
commissioners attendance at those meetings is certainly something that's going to trigger
and stimulate additional discussion about their role in this. We do want to be on the same
page with those folks and we recognize that they have a lot to contribute.

Mr. Kraut Mr. Robinson, then Mr. Lawrence.

Mr. Robinson Thank you, Mr. Kraut.

Mr. Robinson It wasn't coming through.

Mr. Robinson Is it coming through now?

Mr. Robinson Which is that as we look at trying to recover the health system broadly from
the loss of staff and the other struggles that came about as a result of going through the
pandemic. It is clear to us that the key to sort of unlocking this and moving it forward is
actually resolving issues relating to long term care. The importance of the state making
strategic investments both in workforce and regulatory flexibility and reimbursement in the
long term care sector. Right now, hospitals and emergency departments across the state
are backed up. A lot of that back up is due to the fact that nursing homes can't accept
transfers of alternate level of care patients who need to be in nursing homes to nursing
homes. We think that should be a budget priority specifically for the Medicaid program for
this coming year in order to start to rebalance the health system and ensure that people
who need access to hospitals, emergency rooms and other health care settings are able to
get it. That particular issue to our way of thinking, is the biggest block. I'm bringing this up
not in response to your report, but more because of the fact that the budget process is now
underway in the executive branch. This is the time for you and the other members of the
Health Department to consider your input to that process.

Mr. Robinson Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Mr. Lawrence.

Mr. Lawrence Thank you, Dr. Morley, for addressing in outlining the legal structure for
FQHC's and for other providers to be involved with the surge and flex. I think one of the
things that at least has been articulated over time is that we did not want to have a health
care system where people were operating in silos that the best care for New Yorkers or
care where there's an integrated approach to the delivery of services, especially in
neighborhoods that are underserved. I believe in many of those neighborhoods, the
primary go to place for services often are community health centers across the state. One
of the things that I would like to ask is, do we have a sense for what is happening with
primary care? I've heard a number of and seen a number of reports where it's felt that the
primary care is inadequately funded across the state and that really going into the next
year and the year after that, there's going to be a bunch of hurt and pain emanating from
primary care providers. They are dealing with a cost structure that has been impacted as
all others have been impacted by COVID in terms of the labor force and other costs that
have gone up. I guess what I'm trying to get to is, could the department really do an
assessment on what's happening in primary care so that we understand where we are with
that critical element and provider in the delivery system, especially in underserved
neighborhoods. I think that's critically important to have such an assessment and also to
understand the critical role that primary care providers played throughout the pandemic,
first doing testing and then administration of vaccines, in addition to all of the other work



                                              18
that we do in terms of chronic disease and just wellness work. I don't know whether this is
the forum to request that, but I think it is critically important that we have such an
assessment and we know what is happening with a key component of our system.

Mr. Kraut Well, Dr. Morley, it's fortuitous that Ms. Morne is to your right, because the two
of you will be attached to the hip on those issues. Because they do overlap, if you think
about it substantially.

Mr. Kraut Mr. Thomas and then I just don't want to lose a quorum, because we have to
take some votes. We have another speaker. I just want to keep making sure.

Mr. Thomas Hugh Thomas, member of the council. This is directed both Dr. Morley and
Commissioner Herbst. I want to just enthusiastically second Mr. Robinson's comments
about the state of throughput and long term care and its effect on acute care facilities. Dr.
Morley, thank you to the Department for reaching out directly to the region during the
conversations. It's great news to hear that there's a tentative vote. Obviously, our system
and Mr. Robinson system would have been impacted by that. The department is in
constant project with us, so we appreciate it. Commissioner Herbst, just for you in
particular, I think the number in our region is 1,300 nursing home beds off line. All the
acute care facilities are backing up. That's actually regional. I heard from New Jersey,
Connecticut and Downstate last week similar problems. Very specifically would urge you
and you don't have to respond today, Commissioner, but the program, we have a couple
of very specific and important facilities in our region that have requests in and I understand
that there's a process and that there's not limit the least amount of funding. I understand
the challenge, but I would urge you to look carefully at that in the context of really what is a
just a stock throughput process pretty much all over, maybe not so much Downstate, but
certainly in our region. I would urge you to take a look at those applications as you can,
and hopefully we'll have an announcement in terms of your intent to distribute those funds
in the coming weeks.

Mr. Thomas Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Thank you, Dr. Morley.

Mr. Kraut That's a nice introduction to Mr. Herbst, who, as you know, has recently, as part
of the reorganization of some of the department's activity, is heading up the Office of
Ageing and Long Term Care. We've asked him today to kind of give us an overview of the
organization of that office and some of its agenda items and priorities.

Mr. Kraut Mr. Herbst.

Mr. Herbst Good morning. I guess it's good afternoon now. I'm pleased to be back with
you all for today's conversation. I would like to give some background on our new office
and I would also like to provide some updates on a handful of projects before I finish
today. As you've now heard a few times in late July, early August, our department set forth
some important priorities and reorganized the way we work to better serve New Yorkers.
One of those priorities was the creation of the Office of Aging and Long Term Care, or
OALTC, another acronym that the department will be putting into place. We're focused on
optimizing the department's talent and the integration of new systems and increasing
diversity as part of our overall mission to build a healthier, more equitable New York.
OALTC will be dedicated to the needs of aging and disabled New Yorkers. I hope this new
office will help to ensure aging New Yorkers have greater access not only to essential



                                              19
health services, but to appropriate living settings and programs that reduce isolation. The
vision we have for this office and our mission is to foster policy and programs and services
that meet the health and long term care needs of all New Yorkers. This includes support to
those who seek to age in place, as well as people who choose long term care in nursing
facilities. We have an urgency to our mission. New York is already home to the fourth
largest population of residents over the age of 65. Almost 20% of the entire state. In the
coming decade, we are facing a tidal wave of aging New Yorkers. By 2030, a quarter of
our state's population is projected to be over 60. As many of our aging baby boomers will
seek the care and security of nursing homes or adult care facilities. There is also nearly
100,000 New Yorkers residing in nursing home facilities and hundreds of thousands
receiving home care. Long term care spending accounts for nearly 35% of the total state's
Medicaid spending, and that's the state's largest cost driver. We can see this wave
approaching and the necessity of our work. We need to shore up our support for New
York's most vulnerable population, as Dr. Bassett referred to it earlier. Establishing this
new Office of Aging and long term care is an important first step to align the department's
expertise and resources for greater impact not only for aging and disabled New Yorkers,
but also for the families and stakeholders and advocates upon who we all rely on. OALTC
will be responsible for data management and licensing and surveillance policy and finance,
as well as communication programs to help educate and build consensus. We'll also
weave in programming to address our mission to improve public health and health equity
and address the social determinants of health such as transportation, housing and
nutrition. By placing the manifold of issues surrounding long term care under one roof,
we're not just elevating the issue, but we're giving the new office the overall resources that
we need and the power to build a network with one aim. Again, this is to help serve aging
New Yorkers and those who seek long term care facilities. One of our most important
priorities is to ensure New Yorkers can age in place for as long as possible with dignity
and independence and have access to quality care when they need it. The same holds
true for all New Yorkers with disabilities. Both those people who need short term
rehabilitation and those who require long term care or need additional supports to live
meaningful lives in the community. In addition, I referred to the Governor's proposed
master plan for aging, which will lay the foundation for us to change the landscape of aging
and long term care in our state. A foundation that's designed to enforce the long term care
community for the long haul. The master plan will probably be inclusive, focusing on age
friendly health systems and public health initiatives. Again, such as housing and
transportation, community engagement, rural challenges and telehealth and digital
strategies for social engagement. We'll measure outcomes, but most importantly, we'll rely
on equity as a driving factor in the master plan. We'll aim to open up alternatives to nursing
homes and facility based care and will convene with the efforts of the public and the
private sector to convene and create communities that promote healthy living and civic
engagement. We also want to look at other ideas, such as walkable communities that
promote exercise and reliance less on vehicles. OALTC will spearhead the implementation
and the execution of the master plan. We'll focus on creating a blueprint together for
strategies for government and the private sector and the not for profit sector to support
older New Yorkers. We'll ensure the state has policy and programs and they're
coordinated in aligned line to ensure New Yorkers can age in our state with freedom and
dignity and independence for as long as possible. The master plan is a response to the
approaching wave that I mentioned earlier. The actions we're taking now will help us
prepare for the challenges ahead. We cannot do this alone. There's already been so much
expertise coalescing around the master plan. We're grateful for the inputs from
stakeholders and advocates and organizations and welcome insights to continue from all
areas across the long term care ecosystem. We'll certainly rely on the partnership of you
as a partner in addressing the health and long term care needs of aging New Yorkers as



                                             20
well. I look forward to keeping all channels of communication open with you as we build a
more sustainable and integrated system of care. This includes the areas of the the mission
from the role of the Ad Hoc Committee to the State Health Improvement Plan, known as
the Prevention Agenda that we've spoken about a handful of times already today to the
work done in committees and public health discussions, debate on the Committee of
Health Planning and the Committee on Codes and Regulations and Legislation, as well as
the activities related to the licensure and construction process completed. I'd like to now
move and give some quick updates on six areas that OALTC has already initiated. First,
was the reform of various need methodologies. One of the major areas that OALTC has
committed to is changing outdated and restrictive need methodologies, especially in Article
36 and Article 40 hospices. Determining public need is crucial for thoughtful health care
planning. However, determining public need should serve to strengthen and not hinder the
establishment of new facilities and home care services in areas underserved. This must
change, and it will. OALTC is now working on improving and streamlining the need
methodologies to reflect our current ecosystem. OALTC looks forward to working with you
on important issues and welcomes feedback and suggestions as we move forward.
Second is a lifting of the moratorium. As you're aware, the department recently released
the new licensure application process in mid-August. As a result of this new application
release, we anticipate a steady increase in the number of applications that you will be
asked to review and approve. Again, OALTC looks forward to working with EPRC and the
entire membership as we move forward with increasing access to home and community
based services. This must be done responsibly and in a reasonable manner that ensures
high quality health care for New Yorkers in need of home health services. Third is the
critical nursing home quality work. I'm fully aware that for many years you have led the
public discussion on the important question of what nursing home quality should mean.
Nursing home operators should be held responsible and accountable to the residents of
New York's nursing homes and the families who entrust their loved one's care to these
providers. We are committed to this important issue and over the next year we'll work to
strengthen quality in nursing homes through the New York State legislative and regulatory
processes, the executive budget and also thoughtful policy development. We'll look
forward to your support and input. Again, we look forward to partnering with you as we not
only look to improve the quality of nursing homes, but to do so in an efficient and timely
manner. Fourth is the issues related to workforce. The issues of workforce are a major
issue and must be addressed by all health care stakeholders. OALTC has listened to
members ask the fundamental question, How should the department consider the quality
of CON applications when it comes to workforce considerations, especially when reviewing
patient volume projections? Even if an applicant can meet their expected patient volume
projections, how will these applicants find and retain qualified staff? These are important
threshold questions. They'll be asked to consider by the Department on all CON
applications moving forward. OALTC looks forward to working with you in finding common
sense approaches to this crucial and growing problem. Fifth is the reform. Earlier this year,
you heard from Brett Friedman, the former New York state Medicaid Director, as he
provided an in-depth presentation on the structural alternatives for the program of all
inclusive care for the elderly, also known as PACE. OALTC remains committed to working
with OHIP and all our external stakeholders and you of reviewing ways to improve the
states ability to reform the PACE program to promote expansion of this innovative model.
OALTC is in the process now working towards that goal by analyzing ways to implement
and improve the PACE program. As mentioned at the presentation, the legislature has
passed a bill earlier this year to establish a combined licensure and surveillance process
for the PACE program. We look forward to keeping you informed as discussions progress
on this legislation. You will be actively engaged in any policy discussion and regulations
adopted to implement this legislative initiative. Sixth, and finally is streamlining the way we



                                              21
conduct business. We've heard the concern raised by members, and we're eagerly looking
for new ways to address your concerns. Specifically, I'm referring to at the last meeting
you asked, how can we streamline processes to ensure that you thoroughly review and
consider the most important matters related to CON and establishment and construction
applications and remove matters of important but at times ministerial implication from your
busy and full agendas. As a follow up to this question, I have OALTC staff now looking for
better ways of reforming our work in the upcoming cycle, and I'll have more comment on
this with different solutions very soon and look forward to further conversation with each of
you at the upcoming meetings. Once again, we believe is a vital partner in working with the
department on Health Care Policy and OALTC wants to engage with you in discussing the
prevention agenda that Dr. Bassett has discussed now, and to work closely with all of our
committees and get your input and final approval. It will help lessen the need to
overstretch the indispensable time that uses at these meetings and discuss aging and long
term care projects and concerns. I hope that OALTC will continue to foster community
within this critical industry. We need to keep all channels of communication open as we
build a more sustainable, integrated system of care. The work ahead of us is certainly
expansive and critical for all aging New Yorkers. During the next few weeks, the OALTC
team and I will reach out to each of you to discuss ways we can improve upon our work in
these areas and get your feedback and ideas. I also look forward to being present at any
committee and presentations to provide more detail as you may deem important for the
aging and long term care sector.

Mr. Herbst Thank you.

Mr. Herbst I welcome any comments or questions you may have.

Mr. Kraut Thank you, Mr. Herbst, for that great overview. Again, it's a packed agenda.
You'll find a very, I think, engaged and meaningful partner on many of the items you
raised.

Mr. Kraut Does anybody have any questions?

Mr. Kraut I'll start with Mr. La Rue, go to Dr. Boufford then, Ms. Monroe.

Mr. La Rue Good afternoon. Thank you for the presentation. I don't have a specific
question. I just want to acknowledge and share our appreciation with the department for
the way it's been reorganized in creating this focus on long term care. It's something that
the group here has been discussing for a number of years. We're really excited that you're
leading this effort. We look forward to working with you to improve the life of older New
Yorkers.

Mr. Herbst Thank you very much.

Dr. Boufford As I say formally, I'll associate myself with Mr. La Rue's comments. Really
terrific intervention also, in your holistic view. I just want to make two comments. One, you
referred to the prevention agenda several times, which is terrific. One thing that I think we
sometimes forget about it there are objectives for older persons in each of the overall
goals of the prevention agenda. This was a long conversation that we had in creating the
latest version of the prevention agendas, rather than having an isolated goal for aging or
for older people, we would embedded in each of the five goals. It'll be great to really look
specifically at that in relation to the priorities set by local communities for the areas they're
going to work on. The other thing is a friendly amendment to the name of your office,



                                               22
which would be to call it the Office of Healthy Aging and Long Term Care. I think you could
still say OAL, because O would be OH, right? ALTC. I wanted to put that on the possibility
range early on in your existence.

Mr. Kraut She just wants to get to you before you order the T-shirts.

Mr. Herbst I think the mugs and pencils have been ordered.

Mr. Kraut Ms. Monroe.

Ms. Monroe Yes.

Ms. Monroe Thank you very much.

Ms. Monroe I really like the way you've structured the six areas. Each one of them cries
out for data. That means baselines and goals and progress. I think if you can work with us
to incorporate that kind of data into the work that we're doing, I think we'll be far ahead.
Very often we're talking in general terms or we're given numbers verbally, and it's hard to
contain all of those. I'd like to see you develop almost a dashboard that could be reported
on that has, as I said, baseline and progress and goals that we could look at every time as
a dashboard, but maybe spend our time on the two or three things that emerge from the
dashboard as most important to discuss. Again, thank you for the work you're doing. I think
we all look forward to real progress on these issues.

Mr. Herbst Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Thank you, Mr. Herbst, so much for again, for the report.

Mr. Kraut I'm now going to ask Mr. Holt, which I had jumped to right away when I started
the meeting. I guess I just didn't want to lose the ability to have a quorum for a vote.
Please give us the report on Codes, Regulations and Legislation.

Mr. Holt Thank you, Mr. Kraut.

Mr. Holt I will note that when I originally spoke, I said good morning and I will now be able
to say good afternoon.

Mr. Kraut As long as you don't say good night.

Mr. Holt At today's meeting of the Committee on Codes, Regulations and Legislation, the
committee reviewed and voted to recommend adoption of the following emergency
regulations for approval to the full council. The first being the investigation of
communicable disease. Staff from the department presented the Regulation to the
Committee on Codes and are available to the council should there be any questions of the
members.

Mr. Holt I move to accept this regulation.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion from Mr. Holt. I have a second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Are there any questions from the council?




                                             23
Mr. Kraut I'll call for a vote.

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Watkins as well.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut Abstentions?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries.

Mr. Holt Second regulation presented by the department staff was regarding face
coverings for COVID-19 prevention. Staff are available should there be any questions.

Mr. Holt Otherwise I so move the adoption of this regulation.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion from Mr. Holt. I have a second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Are there any questions or comments from the council?

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Watkins also voted yes.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut Abstentions?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries.

Mr. Holt The last regulation that we consider related to monkeypox virus, adding it to the
list of sexually transmitted disease. Staff presented to the committee and they're available
should there be any questions.

Mr. Holt Otherwise, I so move the adoption of this regulation.

Mr. Kraut Thank you much.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion from Mr. Holt. I have a second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Are there any additional questions or comments by the counsel?

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut All those opposed?



                                             24
Mr. Kraut Abstentions?

Mr. Kraut Dr. Watkins voted yes in Albany.

Mr. Kraut The motion passes.

Mr. Holt Mr. Chairman, this completes my report.

Mr. Kraut Mr. Holt, thank you very much. Thank you very much for running a wonderful
meeting this morning. We deeply appreciate it.

Mr. Kraut I'm now going to turn to Dr. Kalkut to give the report on the actions of the
Establishment and the Project Review Committee.

Dr. Kalkut We will start with 2 2 1 2 1 8 C, United Memorial Medical Center in Genesee
County. There's a conflict and recusal by Mr. Thomas who's left the room. This is to certify
a new extension clinic at 8103 Oak Orchard Road in Batavia, providing primary care, other
medical specialties and a single specialty ambulatory surgery center services,
gastroenterology. The department and the committee both voted for approval with
contentions and contingencies.

Dr. Kalkut I so move.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion by Dr. Kalkut, second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Are there any questions on this application?

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut Abstentions?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries.

Dr. Kalkut Our next is a set of applications that we're going to bundle. I believe there's ten
applications in here. I will go through them. First is 2 2 1 1 9 9 B, Health Inc. in Kings
County. This is to establish and construct a new diagnosis and treatment center at 1663rd
Street, Brooklyn, to provide primary care and other medical specialty services. Both the
department and the committee recommend approval with conditions and contingencies. 2
2 1 2 1 2 E, Smile New York Outreach LLC in Bronx County. This is to transfer 100% of
ownership interest from one withdrawing member to a new member within the sole
member LLC. Both the department and the committee recommend approval with a
condition and a contingency. Next is a certificate of Debt Solution JGB Health Facilities
Corporation. This request consents for filing to dissolve JGB Health Facilities Corp.
Approval is recommended by both the department and the committee. 2 1 1 1 4 3 E,
AMSC LLC doing business as Downtown Bronx ASC in Bronx County. This is to transfer
100% of membership interest in AMSC LLC doing business as Downtown Bronx ASC.
The department and committee recommend approval with conditions and contingencies
with


                                              25
an expiration of the operating certificate three years from the date of the completion of the
application. 2 2 1 0 9 5 B, Empire CSS LLC doing business as Empire Center for Special
Surgery. This is to establish and construct a new Multispecialty Ambulatory Surgery
Center at 4855 Hylan Boulevard in Staten Island. The department and the committee
recommend approval with condition and contingencies with expiration of the operating
certificate five years from the date of issuance. 2 2 1 2 2 4 E, 21 Reade Place ASC LLC
doing business as Bridgeview Endoscopy in Dutchess County. This is to transfer 41.665%
ownership to five new members of the sole member LLC. Recommendation from the
department and the committee approval with a condition. 2 2 1 2 6 7 E, Advanced
Endoscopy LLC, DBA Advanced Endoscopy Center in Bronx County. This is to transfer
10.71213% ownership from the three withdrawn Class B members to one new member
LLC. The department and committee recommend approval with a condition. 2 2 1 2 7 0 E,
Endoscopy Center of Niagara LLC in Niagara County. This is to transfer 49% ownership
interest from one withdrawing Class A member LLC to two new Class A member LLC. The
department and committee recommend approval with a condition. 2 2 1 2 7 1 E,
Endoscopy Center of Western New York, LLC in Erie County. This is to transfer 100%
ownership from fifteen withdrawing members to two new member LLC. The department
and committee recommend approval with a condition. 2 2 1 2 7 2 E, Island Health Center
in Suffolk County. This is to transfer 10% ownership interest from three withdrawing
members to one new member LLC. The department and committee recommend approval
with a condition.

Dr. Kalkut I so move.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion by Dr. Kalkut to move these applications. A second by Dr.
Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Does anybody have a question on any one of the applications that have been
placed in this batch?

Mr. Kraut Because you're just as a backup facility.

Mr. Kraut Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Strange will declare an interest of the Staten Island application.

Mr. Kraut If there's no other comments, I'll call for a vote.

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut Abstentions?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries.

Dr. Kalkut 2 2 1 2 6 8 E, Carnegie Hill Endoscopy, LLC in New York County. There's a
conflict in recusal by Dr. Lim, who's left the room to transfer 18.66% ownership interest
from three withdrawing Class B members to one new member LLC. The department and
committee recommend approval with a condition. 2 2 1 2 6 9, East Side Endoscopy LLC



                                              26
doing business as East Side Endoscopy and Pain Management Center in New York
County. Again, a conflict and recusal by Dr. Lim, who was out of the room. This is to
transfer 41.926 ownership interest from three withdrawing members to a new member LLC
83.3333% interest from two withdrawing members two existing members within two
member LLC and 9.306 from an existing member to a new member within a member LLC.
Department and committee recommend approval with a condition.

Dr. Kalkut I so move.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion by Dr. Kalkut. I have a second by Dr. Gutierrez. Dr. Lim has left
the room.

Mr. Kraut Are any questions on these applications?

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut Abstentions?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries.

Mr. Kraut Please ask Dr. Lim to enter the room and say goodbye to Mr. La Rue.

Mr. Kraut Are you declaring an interest?

Mr. Kraut Oh, because it says abstain.

Dr. Kalkut 2 2 1 1 8 4 E, Emerest Certified Home Health Care of New York LLC doing
business as Royal Care Certified Home Health Care of New York. This is in Bronx County.
This is to establish Emerest Certified Home Health Care of New York LLC as the new
operative Cabrini Certified Home Health Agency, a certified home health agency currently
operated by Cabrini of Westchester and relocated to 798 Southern Boulevard in the Bronx.
The department and committee recommended approval with conditions and contingencies.

Dr. Kalkut I so move.

Mr. Kraut I have a motion. I have a second by Dr. Gutierrez.

Mr. Kraut Any discussion here?

Mr. Kraut Mr. La Rue.

Mr. La Rue I just want to clarify I abstained in the committee meeting.

Mr. Kraut I reread it wrong.

Mr. La Rue Thank you.

Mr. Kraut It's declaring an interest.



                                             27
Mr. La Rue After consulting with counsel.

Mr. Kraut All those in favor?

All Aye.

Mr. Kraut Opposed?

Mr. Kraut The motion carries with an interest.

Mr. Kraut Thank you.

Dr. Kalkut That concludes the review. .

Mr. Kraut Thank you very much, Dr. Kalkut.

Mr. Kraut That concludes that report.

Mr. Kraut I'll now turn to Ms. Royal, who's going to give us an overview of the long term
care ombudsman's office.

Mr. Kraut I'm assuming she's in Albany.

Ms. Royal I am.

Ms. Royal I'll try to be quick, cause I know we're several hours in. The goals for today
would be to give you the mission and the values of the Long Term Care Ombudsman
Program. We refer to it as LTCOP, another acronym. The administration and structure of
the program.

Mr. Kraut I'm sorry. Could we please have the camera on Ms. Royal, because we can't
see her.

Mr. Kraut Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Go ahead.

Ms. Royal That's okay.

Ms. Royal We wanted to talk about the roles and the responsibilities of a certified
ombudsman, which is both paid staff and volunteers. Our role for the comments and the
nursing home ownership and transfer or establishment process, which is essentially why
we are here. Our program mission is to serve as an advocate and resource for older adults
and persons with disabilities who live in long term care facilities. Anyone in any long term
care facility is who we serve.

Ms. Royal Next slide.

Ms. Royal Sorry, I'm not telling you.




                                             28
Ms. Royal Our program values, which the very main thing for this program is to be a
resident centered focus.

Mr. Kraut I'm sorry, but the slides are not being advanced and we can't see them. You're
just on the title page.

Ms. Royal Looks like they're working on it. I'll wait for them to catch up.

Mr. Kraut Just continue and we'll catch up.

Ms. Royal Okay.

Mr. Kraut That's fine.

Ms. Royal Our program values is primarily to be always resident centered focus.
Everything that we do in this program is based on what a resident wants. We also have a
primary goal to always maintain confidentiality. Anything a resident brings to us is
confidential unless they give us permission to share that information. We're also trying to
be accessible to residents. Our goal is to be available to residents when they need us.
Prevention is another program value. We're working to prevent residents to ensure their
rights are not violated and to be free of abuse, neglect and exploitation. Resident
Empowerment and Autonomy. We're always looking to provide residents with tools to be
as autonomous as possible so that they can advocate for themselves as well. Complaint
resolution. Resolution is a key piece here because we're not looking to Band-Aid issues
that they have. The goal is to have long term resolution to the issues that they may have to
follow up and ensure those things are continued to be resolved and aren't popping up
again. We're also having to be objective. This can be a difficult thing for an ombudsman,
because what we may feel is in the best interest of a resident. They may want a totally
different thing. We have to remain focused on what their goal is and to be objective and
everything that we're doing for the residents. We wanted to give a basic overview of the
administration of the program. The Older Americans Act, which is administered by the
Administration on Community Living ACL, requires each state to establish an independent
office of the state long term care ombudsman. In New York, we are administratively
housed within the Office for the Aging and we provide advocacy services through a
network of regional programs. At the state office, there there's myself as the state
ombudsman who oversees the whole program. I have a senior assistant state
ombudsman. We have three assistant state ombudsmen who supervise the regional
programs. Across the state, we have fifteen regional programs and each of the assistant
state ombudsman are assigned five to oversee. In each region there's a coordinator of that
program and they're responsible for recruiting and training the volunteers throughout the
state. They are responsible for being the regular presence in the nursing homes and adult
care facilities that we serve. To be a certified ombudsman, there's a lot to do. You have to
follow a thirty-six hour certification training. It's a very intense program talking about the
roles and responsibilities of being an ombudsman. And then after your certification,
training for all the years following that you have to now complete eighteen hours of
continuing education throughout each program year. That's a requirement from ACL. Our
volunteers commit two to four hours a week in their facilities that they're assigned to, to
provide those advocacy services. The duties of an ombudsman are to identify, investigate
and resolve complaints made by or on behalf of residents. We do work with families as
well, but primarily they're on behalf of all residents. We inform residents about obtaining
services from the program. When we're doing our regular visits and facilities, we would be
providing residents with information on how to access us if they need us. We generally



                                              29
touch base with any new residents that are coming into a facility so they're aware of our
program. The facilities do have to provide information to all residents about the
ombudsman program as well at least twice a year. We also represent residents interests
before governmental agencies. With legislators, we advocate for things that residents are
asking for us to work with them on. We work with our partner agencies throughout the
state as well to improve the quality of care and quality of life for residents. We do promote
and provide assistance to resident and family councils. We work with facilities that may not
have a resident council to help develop one and help them facilitate those meetings as
well as family councils. Especially since COVID, one of the positive things that came out of
that was in some facilities being able to develop family councils through Zoom, so that
allows more families to participate in those meetings and be more involved in the care of
their loved ones. We do have access to all facilities and all residents at any time. We also
have access to resident records as it relates to a complaint investigation that we may be
working on. We can't have untethered access to a record, but if we're working on a specific
complaint, we may access portions of that record. We are always to be provided with a list
of the residents currently in the facility so that we can meet with new residents as they
come in. Essentially, what is an ombudsman? We are an advocate for residents. That is
the primary focus. We are an educator. We provide education to residents. We provide
education to the community. We provide education to facilities staff and also families. We
are a mediator at times for between a resident and possibly a roommate, their family, the
facility. We may mediate issues to help resolve them for them. We're also a negotiator.
Sometimes we have to negotiate with families, residents and facilities to try to come to an
agreeable solution. Ultimately, we're a problem solver and an advocate for a resident.
What we are not is a long term care facility regulator, a licensing surveyor, an inspector or
investigator. We are not an adult protective services investigator. We are not a provider of
direct care. We cannot provide any direct care to residents when we're in the facility by
federal requirements. The last thing that we are not is a mandated reporter. That's
important to know because that seems to be kind of contrary to our work, but we are not
allowed to report any type of abuse or neglect without a resident's permission or their
family if they are unable to do so or their guardian. We do encourage residents to report
abuse. We may work on finding a solution to that in another way. We may talk with other
residents. Ultimately, if the resident does not want us to report abuse, we're unable to do
that. LTCOP and Department of Health have similar roles, but different. Both Department
of Health and LTCOP oversight entities for long term care facilities. Department of Health
looks more whether a facility is meeting regulatory standards and they have the ability to
issue citations for non-compliance. We look at any expression of dissatisfaction that a
resident may bring to us. We're looking for resolution to that at that time. We're not able to
issue citations. We may file complaints on the things that we see, but we're not able to
ultimately evaluate whether that meets the regulatory compliance. Department of Health
andLTCOP both have presence in facilities, but those presents are different. Department
of Health visits facilities for inspections, generally annual inspections or a complaint that
they may receive. That would be the reasons generally that they're attending or visiting a
facility. We visit more frequently. The purpose of our visits are to develop a rapport with
residents and develop a trusting relationship with them, and also to develop a working
relationship with the facility to help mediate the issues that residents may raise. We are
there to provide education and information to residents, families and even facility staff
while we're addressing concerns. We have more of a regular presence. Both agencies
receive and investigate complaints, but we investigate differently. Department of Health is
assessing the regulatory compliance. That is their role. We may be looking at more
possible causes for a problem. We're trying to work with a facility to resolve that issue prior
to it rising to the level of a regulatory need. We want to help a facility solve an issue before
it has to escalate to the need to involve Department of Health. We do collaborate with



                                              30
Department of Health. We have a good working relationship. We now have a dedicated
online complaint form for the Ombudsman programs to file complaints with Department of
Health and also a dedicated hotline number to Department of Health to file our complaints.
We are also involved in Department of Health's annual inspection survey and exit
conference. We know when they're there to visit a facility for a survey. We are able to
attend the exit conference and provide information to Department of Health. We also have
relationships at the regional level. Our regional offices from the Office and Program of
Department of Health may reach out to each other with questions, you know, inform them
of things that may be happening in a facility that we're able to that's not resident specific.
We also work at the state level, the State Department of Health, the central office and us.
We have a conversation fairly regularly, just to keep each other updated and share
information. There is a collaboration between the two agencies. The ultimate goal, to
improve the lives and ensure the quality of care for residents. The LTCOP
recommendations, which is mainly the reason that we're here, is part of Chapter 141 of the
laws of 2021, where the long term care program would comment on any ownership,
transfers or establishment of new facilities. We wanted to give you some information on
how we come to those comments, because our role isn't enforcement, our role is very
different. We have different avenues of how we develop our comments. All at the
beginning, Department of Health will inform us of any applications for ownership, transfer
or establishment. We review those applications. We're focusing on the facilities that are
currently owned or operated by proposed owners. That's inclusive of adult care facilities. If
a proposed owner does also have stake in a adult care facility, we're going to look at our
information related to that adult care facility as well. We review our data in our data system
related to how many complaints they may have had, how many visits we've had to that
facility in the past three years. We look at what types of complaints those are. Are we
visiting on a routine basis? We also look at if there's abuse complaints. We would be really
focusing on those if there's frequent abuse complaints in those facilities. We have calls
with our regional programs to gather the overall information on a facility. While they're
doing those routine visits we want to know, do the residents appear to be; comfortable,
happy? Their conversations with them. Do they feel that the residents are accepting of the
facility and how it's managed? We talk to the resident counsels. What type of input we get
from the resident counsels and what types of complaints that the resident counsel may
bring to us. We ask about what type of relationship the facility administration has with the
long term care ombudsman program. If we're bringing them an issue, are they willing to
work with us to try to resolve that for a resident, or is it an adversarial relationship? We ask
about activities. What types of activities the residents have available? Do they seem to
attend them? We ask about food issues. Food is a big thing in facilities. I mean, that's a
key piece to some residents lives is their meals. We ask about those types of things. Also
the cleanliness of the facility or the structure of the facility. Are their concerns with how it's
being taken care of? We take into consideration a whole lot of observations, interactions
and the actual data and complaints that we see before we make our recommendation.
Ultimately, once that's been decided upon with gathering all that information, we submit
our recommendation to you to review our recommendation. I attend the council meetings
as well.

Ms. Royal And that is it.

Ms. Royal Thank you for giving me the opportunity to provide you with some information.

Mr. Kraut Ms. Royal, thank you so much for that. That was a very cogent and clear
explanation of the office. We're really looking forward, as you outlined, you have a role to
play in our review. We're particularly interested as it applies to the character and



                                               31
competence of operating the facilities to focus it, you know, and that, you know, every
place has issues that they need to address. Hopefully you and your colleagues are great
mediators to make sure individual ones. We're particularly looking at patterns. We want to
look at, you know, it has to rise to something that's substantive, that's documented, and it's
just not one and dones. We think that it's a welcome addition of information that we believe
is critical in evaluating candidates of competence and character to operate these facilities.

Mr. Kraut Thank you very much.

Mr. Kraut Unless there's something burning, I just I see I'm losing the room. I have one
other presentation. I'd really like to get to it. Unless anybody has any questions for Ms.
Royal, I'll hold off.

Mr. Kraut Thank you so much.

Mr. Kraut I appreciate it.

Ms. Royal Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Thank you.

Mr. Kraut Now, I'll turn the mic over to Mr. Hennessey and Ms. Shulman, who is going to
give us a overview of clinical staffing.

Mr. Hennessey Thank you very much.

Mr. Hennessey My name is Mark Hennessey. I'm the Director at the Center for Health
Care Provider Services and Oversight.

Mr. Kraut Just pull it a little closer.

Mr. Hennessey Try to talk as quick as I can.

Mr. Hennessey We're here today to talk to you a little bit about safe staffing standards for
hospitals. There's two different laws that deal with safe staffing. One deals with hospitals,
the other one deals with nursing homes. Today, we're specifically only talking about
hospitals.

Mr. Hennessey Could have the next slide, please.

Mr. Hennessey The legislature worked on a law and passed that law. The law was signed
on June of 2021. The law outlines a lot of the different lessons that were learned by
facilities as well as by people that work in facilities during the pandemic. It really focuses
on the idea of making sure that there's sufficient staffing to help reduce errors,
complications, adverse patient care events and also support the idea of retaining skilled
staff. We see a lot of information about those kinds of issues as we do work and
investigations. This law really seems to amplify the idea of making sure that there's
sufficient staffing to provide care to individuals who are in those facilities. There's also a
couple of sections within the law that specifically talk about evidence based staffing
standards. There's a little bit we're going to talk about later on about that. Also the
importance of transparency. A lot of the data and information that's collected through this




                                             32
process is actually available on the State Department of Health's website almost in real
time from when we get it. There's a real emphasis on that as well.

Mr. Hennessey Go to the next slide, please.

Mr. Hennessey There's a couple of terms that exist within the law that we thought it was
important to make sure that folks are aware of. General Hospital. Not going to reread the
regulation, but this is the normal definition which is applicable to general hospitals. Within
the law, there's the designation that each of the general hospitals is required to supply one
of these safe staffing plans to the department. And then that safe staffing plan it's require
that each of those safe staffing plans have a description of the patient care unit, which is a
unit within that hospital that provides direct patient care. There's been some discussion on
who is it applicable to? Who is not applicable to? The law is actually applicable to any of
those patient care units. The last one and this is, I promise, the last definition we'll talk
through here is ancillary members of the frontline team. These are folks who are not RN's,
not LPN's, but a patient care technician, certified nursing assistants and other non-
licensed staff who help with nursing or clinical tasks. You'll understand, in maybe a slider
to why it's important for us to talk about that definition.

Mr. Hennessey If we could have the next slide, please.

Mr. Hennessey All of the hospitals were required to establish a clinical staffing committee.
They were allowed to create those as new committees or assign the functions of a
committee to an existing one. Specifically, in the cases where there is a collective
bargaining agreement and it provides for a staffing committee that CBA is then going to
really take the place of any of the rest of the structure that exists.

Mr. Hennessey Next slide, please.

Mr. Hennessey As I mentioned earlier, there's a real emphasis on making sure that the
workers view is represented on those clinical staff and committees. At least half of the
members are required to be registered nurses, LPN's or again, that term I talked about
earlier, which is the AMFT's. They generally speaking, are people provide direct care to
patients. They require that at least half of those members are people that fit that category,
but then up to one half of the members are also selected by a general hospital
administration. The Chief Financial Officer, the Chief Nursing Officer, directors of those
patient care units are people that are mentioned specifically as folks who should be within
this committee. In the case that there's no CBA, the members of the committee may be
selected by their peers. How that selection takes place. If there is a CBA, there's a
selection of RN's, LPN's and the AMFT's, according to the respected CBA. Another point
that's raised is the importance of making sure that people who participate in these clinical
staffing committees are given the opportunity to do so while being paid for their normal
rate of pay. We have started to take receipt of some complaints in certain circumstances
where there complaints that are raised about I wasn't allowed to go and work in the clinical
staffing committee. We thought it was important to note that. And all of this, I should say, is
really meant in part to you know, I don't think we've ever done a walk through of this new
law. We want to make sure that you had more than just sort of the pencil sketch of things
that you might otherwise get. Those clinical staffing committees are required to come up
with that plan. They can do it in a number of different ways. They can use specific
guidelines or ratios, matrixes or grids. When we've looked at some of the plans that have
come in and we'll talk about how they come in a little bit, it has led to them looking a little
bit different. The nice thing, again, is if you go on the department's website, you can look



                                              33
at any of the plans that we've collected thus far. There are, I think, over 200 of them, but
you will see that they look a little bit different in form of function because each of these
hospitals is a little bit different. Those clinical staffing committees then are supposed to do
a semi-annual review of the clinical staffing plan. The last piece is that they're supposed to
review and respond to complaints as they come in and do an assessment. In
circumstances where the department is going to do some work on one of those complaints
or the plans, that kind of stuff, we may be working with the clinical staffing plan to get a
greater understanding of what they know.

Mr. Hennessey Next slide, please.

Mr. Hennessey That Clinical Staffing committee adopts a clinical staffing plan. For each of
those patient care units, there can be consensus that is reached where there's agreement
on what those staffing levels should be. There can also be non consensus and in that
case, the Chief Executive Officer is allowed to make a decision that's sort of a tiebreaker
decision. When they submit those clinical staffing plans to us or the hospitals do, at that
point it's really important for the CO in that case to designate to us and point out to us,
here's the reason why we couldn't reach consensus.

Mr. Hennessey At this point, I'll hand it over to Stephanie Shulman, who's the Director of
the Division of Hospitals Diagnostic Treatment Centers.

Ms. Shulman Let me talk to you about the rest of the clinical staffing.

Ms. Shulman Better?

Ms. Shulman Good.

Ms. Shulman I'm a little shorter than Mark.

Ms. Shulman Now, we'll talk a little bit about the implementation itself of the clinical
staffing plans. Beginning on January 1st, 2023, and annually after that, hospitals are
required to implement their clinical staffing plans that they adopted on July 1st of the
previous calendar year. They also need to implement any subsequent amendments and
assign personnel to each patient care unit in accordance with the plan. Under Public
Health Law, 2805 T, each patient care unit within the hospital is required to have a
separate clinical staffing plan. This plan needs to be posted so people in the hospital can
see it and review it. It must include the actual daily staffing for that shift on that unit, as well
as the relevant clinical staffing plan. Therefore, there will be some units that may not run
three shifts and their clinical staffing plan would be reflective of that.

Ms. Shulman Next slide, please.

Ms. Shulman Regarding the annual clinical staffing plan submission. The plan is required
to be submitted to the department by the Chief Executive Officer of the facility or their
designee by July 1st of every year. It must be handed in. We will be reminding them if it's
not handed in prior to that time. All data submitted must be accurate and needs to be
compliant with Section 2805 T. If the adopted clinical staffing plan is amended, hospitals
need to submit that to the department within thirty days of adoption. All of those clinical
staffing plants, as described earlier, are posted on the department's website. When a
staffing plan is amended, the previous one is taken down. The new amended staffing plan
is put on the website. The statute is very specific regarding quality indicators, and these



                                                34
include the number of RN's, LPN's and unlicensed personnel providing direct care. Those
unlicensed personnel are really important, because they assist the professional staff in
providing that level of care that the patient needs. This information must be expressed in
actual numbers in terms of total hours of nursing care per patient. This includes
adjustment for case mix and acuity. That's important because not every unit on the
hospital is the same. As a percentage of patient care staff and must be broken down for
total patient care staff for each unit and each shift. All of these methods for determining
these clinical staffing plans need to be recorded and available to the department for
review. Data regarding complaints, investigation of these complaints, findings as the result
of the investigation and then degree of compliance must also be provided to the
department.

Ms. Shulman Next slide, please.

Ms. Shulman There is an annual report requirement in the statute. The department is
required to draft an annual report. This annual report does include the number of
complaints submitted to the department, the outcome of these complaints, the number of
investigations conducted and then the costs associated for these complaint investigations.
The statute also requires a stakeholder work group. That workgroup is comprised of
members of the hospital associations and the unions who represent nurses and the other
ancillary members of the front line team. The stakeholder group will review that annual
report prior to its submission. The department is required to finalize and submit an annual
report by December 31st, 2022. That report is submitted to the Governor, the Speaker of
the Assembly, the Temporary President of the Senate, and the Health Committee Chairs.

Ms. Shulman Next slide, please.

Ms. Shulman The statute also requires the development of an independent advisory
committee. The Independent Advisory committee must consist of nine experts. Three of
those experts are individuals who have knowledge and specialized in nursing practice,
quality of nursing care or patient care standards. Three additional individuals are
representatives of the unions who represent nurses. There's an additional three members
who represent the general hospitals. This advisory committee is tasked with evaluating the
effectiveness of the Clinical Staffing committee, review of the annual report and making
recommendations to the Speaker of the Assembly, the temporary President of the Senate,
and the Chairs of both of the Health Committees of the Assembly and the Senate.

Ms. Shulman Next slide, please.

Ms. Shulman Regarding the status of our deliverables, the annual report. We're currently
collecting and compiling all complaints related to staffing submitted to the department and
following up on those potential investigations. The statutory deadline for this is December
31st, 2022. We're also in the process of developing regulations regarding both the uniform
collection of nursing quality indicators. We've already have reviewed some data collected
as we described earlier. The staffing plans are currently posted on the department's
website. We're making revisions to ensure that we have uniform data collection. We found
in some of the plans that were received. Acronyms were used. We want these plans to be
very comparable and very easy to be able to analyze and collate. We're working on all of
that standardisation internally. The statutory deadline for that is also December 31st, 2022.
Regarding the development of regulations, we're also working on the development of
those, and that's a work in progress at this point in time.




                                             35
Unidentified Speaker I'm just not sure if Dr. Morley's still on. I thought he might want to
say something at the end of this.

Dr. Morley Still here.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Morley, would you like to add anything? Just because I'm going to lose the
room in a little while.

Dr. Morley Into two seconds, I can tell you that it was our hope that we were going to be
able to do some more on regulations, but this has been the statute. We've done it
because, A, the statute was a long time ago, over a year. Two, it was complicated. Three,
it was detailed. Negotiations are still taking place. Now, I have a high confidence level that
we'll have regulations that we will review with you provide some education on at the
December meeting.

Mr. Kraut Well, I think this is a critically important kind of background for that discussion.
At least I'm glad you did it now, so we'll have some good sense of context.

Mr. Kraut I do want to open it up and take the opportunity, because what we don't want to
do is you work on regulations, come back to us and then we start asking all kinds of
questions.

Mr. Kraut If anybody has any comments. Remember, they have limited ability to ask very
direct answers.

Mr. Thomas This statute is quite detailed as you both mentioned. Inside of it there is an
enormous amount of discretion and definitional things. When you're talking about 24/7 365
operations in general hospitals of a varying acuity. I guess, my only comment would be as
you're developing your regulations and I'm sure you're in communication with operations
folks, you've got an independent committee that includes general hospital operators that
you'd be really sensitive to potentially some unintended consequences as you develop
your regulations. You don't have to comment now, but there's a whole I mean, we have
eight hospitals in our system, so we're doing this and just the precision of the statute pretty
good, but now the regulations could really enhance or really detract from the ultimate goal
from our perspective. Just a request. No need to respond. I'm sure you're seeking input
from a lot of people, a lot of people with interest in this. No lack of opinions, I'm sure.

Mr. Hennessey The only thing I will add because I think it's important. I think we're always
open to listening to anyone who has a viewpoint on this topic and pretty much any other
topic we work on. I will say that in the work that we've done thus far, we've received a lot of
information back from hospitals that really has told the story of what you're just talking
about, that there is a level of complication and a level of specialization that you see in
different types of care, but specifically from hospital to hospital, hospital that makes a level
of uniqueness that we're trying to harmonize a lot of different sort of capabilities to get to
there.

Mr. Kraut I suspect that's going to be your major challenge is because just no two patient
units are identical, as you said. No two hospitals in any particular area. It has to have
flexibility with respect to situational awareness. Obviously, everybody wants to staff at an
optimum level. But if you can't recruit that staff, as you heard your actually the colleagues
from the Department of Health today acknowledge we're having issues Upstate in
particular and frankly, throughout, you know, you can have a regulation, but if you can't



                                              36
recruit and it's very clear given the environment of the reasons why we can't, we have to
work on solutions that allow us to do that. And that's, frankly, a little outside of the statute
of the regs. There's a lot of interconnect.

Mr. Hennessey Thank you for saying that, Mr. Kraut.

Mr. Hennessey That requires flexibility in terms of individuals, training, care plans, etc. In
some point the statute, the language and your regulations are going to conflict and
ultimately collide with reality. Reality is what Mr. Kraut just said. Now, hopefully it's a
pendulum and it'll swing back and we won't be having this conversation in a couple of
years. While you're developing your regulations, you're hearing that.

Mr. Kraut Dr. Boufford has one comment.

Dr. Boufford It's sort of a question. I think it was raised by the presentation. Many of these
elements were part of the nurse staffing standards regs that you brought forward. This is
really, really, really helpful. You raised two magic words, workforce and quality, which we
don't talk much about. I was just curious as to using that and the workforce issues.
Obviously, Dr. Gutierrez has been on this for the last four or five years. Where does the
input to us from that? Do those two categories come from? Not these clinical standards,
but looking I know they're part of the waiver budget implied. There would be investment in
workforce and workforce development. We had a little bit on what's going on with the
Public Health Fellowship. It wasn't exactly, you know, it's useful, but not in depth. The
same thing on the quality side. Do we address those two issues? Are they sitting
somewhere where we could at least have a presentation about them if they're not in our
remit?

Mr. Kraut Just specifically, we've had discussions here about joining the Interstate
Compact that allows us access to licensed personnel from other states. That obviously
would be a major help in addressing some of these things. There are things that are
outside of DOH and Department of Education, Licensing and the pipeline issues as well.
They're not necessarily in the department's purview, but they're certainly related. It's a
complicated enough issue as it is. You guys have a responsibility to kind of move this
along and bring it back to us.

Mr. Kraut I'll give Dr. Gutierrez the final word.

Dr. Gutierrez Somebody who has been removed from the trenches of hospital work and
clinical care for a long time now, I still hear the calls from the people that are still in the
trenches of what they have to do and what they cannot do because they don't have the
time. It's a request for flexibility and try to appear not draconian on this, because I don't
think that unless you put that in front of you, you're not going to have a high level of
success soon.

Mr. Kraut Let me put a pin in the conversation. You've heard flexibility is the key word
when you bring it back to this council for approval and review. We wish you well. We're
here to work with you. We understand what needs to be done. There's a time frame to get
this started. Please, at our next so let me just use this. I want to remind everybody that the
next meeting of the council is going to be--.

Mr. Kraut I'm sorry.




                                               37
Mr. Kraut John, did you want to speak?

Dr. Morley That's okay. I just wanted to remind folks that the legislature did identify
money. We are creating in OPCHSM, the Center for Workforce Innovation. We're in the
process of hiring a director and then we'll be hiring about eight or nine folks. This will be a
part of my report going forward.

Mr. Kraut Great.

Mr. Kraut That's what Dr. Boufford was saying. Where's the money?

Mr. Kraut The next meeting of the council is going to be on November 17th in Albany and
New York City for committee day, and on December 8th in Albany and New York City for
the council meeting. On the eighth in particular, please try to have your schedules, arrange
it. It's in both places. Both here and New York City. We may need a little more time to go
through an agenda. I particularly just want to thank Colleen Leonard and Michael and the
rest of the staff. She's now operating out of two locations simultaneously dealing with
things. As you saw this morning with the Codes Committee, with a number of people to
speak, it's very, very complex. I just want to also thank Celeste Johnson who is our
Associate Commissioner and Regional Director for the support in helping us down here in
New York City in particular. We really thank you. We know how much harder this is.
Hopefully, the legislature will revisit some of the Zoom options for public and open
meetings.

Mr. Kraut With that, I have a motion to adjourn the Public Health and Health Planning
Committee meeting.

Mr. Kraut So moved, Dr. Berliner.

Mr. Kraut Second.

Mr. Kraut We are adjourned.

Mr. Kraut Thank you so much.




                                              38
            PUBLIC HEALTH AND HEALTH PLANNING COUNCIL
Empire State Plaza, Corning Tower, Room 1805                      (518) 402-0964
Albany, New York 12237                                            PHHPC@health.ny.gov


December 8, 2022

Senator Gustavo Rivera
Chair, Senate Health Committee
Assemblyman Richard Gottfried
Chair, Assembly Health Committee
New York State Legislature
The Capitol
Albany, NY 11237

Re:    Nursing Home Minimum Direct Resident Care Spend Section 415.34 Title 10 NYCRR
       Nursing Home Staffing Requirements Sections 415.2 and 415.3 Title 10 NYCRR

I am writing at the request of the members of the NYS Public Health and Health Planning
Council (PHHPC) regarding our recent review and approval of regulations to implement the two
important pieces of legislation referenced above that were enacted as part of the 2021-2022
Executive Budget.

At the outset we want to commend both the Executive and the Legislative branches for
addressing what PHHPC believes is an important issue, the quality of care delivered in New
York State’s nursing homes. As an oversight body we had struggled with this issue for years
because of a lack of legislative and regulatory clarity. PHHPC welcomes the establishment of
regulatory standards which attempt to more clearly define operating parameters related to
strengthening the quality of care provided in skilled nursing facilities.

However, during our review of these specific proposed regulations at our November 17th Codes
Committee hearing and subsequent full PHHPC Council meeting, our members were placed in a
difficult position of having to approve a proposed regulation that closely conformed to the
enacted statute but, in our view, did not fully address the complex realities of the operating
environment that health care providers are now confronting. In particular, the current critical
health care staffing shortage is having a profound impact on the provision of health care across
the care continuum within New York State and we knowingly approved a regulation that a
significant number of nursing home providers cannot comply with.
As you are aware, PHHPC is comprised of informed health professionals representing a
continuum of interests and stakeholder groups including consumers, and we reluctantly approved
the regulations because we were advised that delaying such action would have potentially
resulted in significant penalties imposed on the nursing home industry and that the
Commissioner would not have been granted discretionary enforcement powers to help interpret
some of the more challenging statutory provisions. Therefore, even though many relevant issues
were raised, PHHPC believed a failure to act at this juncture, may have undermined the intent to
improve the quality of care rendered in New York State nursing homes. PHHPC acknowledges
that this is not the best process to develop, discuss, and approve meaningful regulations.

PHHPC strongly believes that if the legislation were drafted today, with knowledge of the impact
of the current staffing crisis, the statute would have anticipated some of the issues; certain
definitions would be enhanced, and provisions broadened to improve the legislative intent of the
statute.

In the coming months PHHPC members will be working closely with DOH staff, within the
parameters of the enacted statute, to revise the regulations, where change or clarity may be
warranted. However, some of the changes we seek may require legislative action.
Therefore, as issues arise and are brought to your attention, it is PHHPC’s fervent hope that the
legislature will consider amending parts of these two statutes to address new, complex issues that
were not previously anticipated and support efforts to achieve greater accountability for nursing
home quality of care.

If invited, I and members of PHHPC would be available to discuss our concerns and ideas in
greater detail.

Respectfully,

Jeffrey Kraut
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Public Health and Health Planning Council and the

Commissioner of Health by Sections 225, 576, and 2803 of the Public Health Law, Sections 2.1

and 2.5 of Title 10 (Health) of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the

State of New York are amended, Section 2.6 is repealed and a new Section 2.6 is added, Section

405.3 is amended and a new Section 58-1.14 is added, to be effective upon filing with the

Secretary of State, to read as follows:




Subdivision (a) of section 2.1 is amended to read as follows:

(a) When used in the Public Health Law and in this Chapter, the term infectious, contagious or

communicable disease, shall be held to include the following diseases and any other disease

which the commissioner, in the reasonable exercise of his or her medical judgment, determines

to be communicable, rapidly emergent or a significant threat to public health, provided that the

disease which is added to this list solely by the commissioner’s authority shall remain on the list

only if confirmed by the Public Health and Health Planning Council at its next scheduled

meeting:

                                          *      *       *

[Monkeypox] Mpox

                                          *      *       *

Section 2.5 is amended to read as follows:

A physician in attendance on a person affected with or suspected of being affected with any of

the diseases mentioned in this section shall submit to an approved laboratory, or to the laboratory
of the State Department of Health, for examination of such specimens as may be designated by

the State Commissioner of Health, together with data concerning the history and clinical

manifestations pertinent to the examination:

                                         *         *     *

[Monkeypox] Mpox

                                         *         *     *

Section 2.6 is repealed and replaced as follows:

2.6 Investigations and Response Activities.

(a) Except where other procedures are specifically provided in law, every local health authority,

   either personally or through a qualified representative, shall immediately upon receiving a

   report of a case, suspected case, outbreak, or unusual disease, investigate the circumstances

   of such report at any and all public and private places in which the local health authority has

   reason to believe, based on epidemiological or other relevant information available, that such

   places are associated with such disease. Such investigations and response activities shall,

   consistent with any direction that the State Commissioner of Health may issue:

   (1) Verify the existence of a disease or condition;

   (2) Ascertain the source of the disease-causing agent or condition;

   (3) Identify unreported cases;

   (4) Locate and evaluate contacts of cases and suspected cases, as well as those reasonably

       expected to have been exposed to the disease;

   (5) Collect and submit, or cause to be collected or submitted, for laboratory examination

       such specimens as may furnish necessary or appropriate information for determining the

                                                   2
       source of disease, or to assist with diagnosis; and furnish or cause to be furnished with

       such specimens pertinent data on forms prescribed by the State Commissioner of Health,

       including but not limited to the history of cases, physical findings and details of the

       epidemiological investigation;

   (6) With the training or assistance of the State Department of Health, examine the processes,

       structures, conditions, machines, apparatus, devices, equipment, records, and material

       within such places that may be relevant to the investigation of disease or condition;

   (7) Instruct a responsible member of a household or entity, as applicable, to implement

       appropriate actions to prevent further spread of a disease; and

   (8) Take any other steps to reduce morbidity and mortality that the local health authority

       determines to be appropriate.



(b) When a case or suspected case of a disease, condition, outbreak, or unusual disease occurs in

   any business, organization, institution, or private home, the person in charge of the business,

   organization, institution or the home owner, as well as any individuals or entities required to

   report pursuant to sections 2.10 and 2.12 of this Part, shall cooperate with the State

   Department of Health and local health authorities in the investigation of such disease,

   condition, outbreak, or unusual disease.



(c) Investigation Updates and Reports.

   (1) Upon request of the State Department of Health, the local health authority shall submit

       updates and reports on outbreak investigations to the State Department of Health. The




                                                 3
       content, timeframe, and manner of submission of such updates shall be determined by the

       State Department of Health.

   (2) The local health authority shall complete investigation reports of outbreaks within 30

       days of the conclusion of the investigation in a manner prescribed by the State

       Commissioner of Health, unless the State Commissioner of Health prescribes a different

       time period.



(d) Commissioner authority to lead investigation and response activities.

   (1) The State Commissioner of Health may elect to lead investigation and response activities

       where:

           (i) Residents of multiple jurisdictions within the State are affected by an outbreak of

                a reportable disease, condition, or unusual disease; or

           (ii) Residents in a jurisdiction or jurisdictions within the State and in another state or

                states are affected by an outbreak of a reportable disease, condition, or unusual

                disease; or

           (iii) An outbreak of an unusual disease or a reportable disease or condition involves a

                single jurisdiction with the high potential for statewide impact.

   (2) Where the State Commissioner of Health elects to lead investigation and response

       activities pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subdivision, local health authorities shall take

       all reasonable steps to assist in such investigation and response, including supply of

       personnel, equipment or information. Provided further that the local health authority shall

       take any such action as the State Commissioner of Health deems appropriate and that is

       within the jurisdiction of the local health authority. Any continued investigation or


                                                  4
       response by the local health authority shall be solely pursuant to the direction of the State

       Commissioner of Health, and the State Commissioner of Health shall have access to any

       investigative materials which were heretofore created by the local health authority.




Paragraph (11) of subdivision (d) of section 405.3 is amended, paragraph (12) is renumbered

paragraph (13), and a new paragraph (12) is added, to read as follows:

(d) Records and reports. Any information, records or documents provided to the department shall

be subject to the applicable provisions of the Public Health Law, Mental Hygiene Law,

Education Law, and the Public Officers Law in relation to disclosure. The hospital shall maintain

and furnish to the Department of Health, immediately upon written request, copies of all

documents, including but not limited to:

                                           *     *       *

(11) written minutes of each committee's proceedings. These minutes shall include at least the

following:

       (i) attendance;

       (ii) date and duration of the meeting;

       (iii) synopsis of issues discussed and actions or recommendations made; [and]

(12) whenever the commissioner determines that there exists an outbreak of a highly contagious

communicable disease pursuant to Part 2 of this Title or other public health emergency, such

syndromic and disease surveillance data as the commissioner deems appropriate, which the

hospital shall submit in the manner and form determined by the commissioner; and


                                                 5
(13) any record required to be kept by the provisions of this Part.

                                                ***

Section 405.3 is amended by adding a new subdivision (g) as follows:

(g) Whenever the commissioner determines that there exists an outbreak of a highly contagious

communicable disease pursuant to Part 2 of this Title or other public health emergency, the

commissioner may direct general hospitals, as defined in Article 28 of the public health law, and

consistent with the federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), to accept

patients pursuant to such procedures and conditions as the commissioner may determine

appropriate.




New section 58-1.14 is added to read as follows:

Section 58-1.14 Reporting of certain communicable diseases.

(a) The commissioner shall designate those communicable diseases, as defined by section 2.1 of

the Sanitary Code, that require prompt action, and shall make available on the Department’s

website a list of such communicable diseases.

(b) Laboratories performing tests for screening, diagnosis or monitoring of communicable

diseases requiring prompt action pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section, for New York State

residents and/or New York State health care providers, shall:

       (i) immediately report to the commissioner all positive results for such communicable

       diseases in a manner and format as prescribed by the commissioner; and




                                                 6
(ii) report all results, including positive, negative and indeterminate results, to the

commissioner in a time and manner consistent with Public Health Law § 576-c.




                                           7
                          REGULATORY IMPACT STATEMENT

Statutory Authority:

       The statutory authority for the regulatory amendments to Part 2 of Title 10 of the Official

Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York is Section 225 of the

Public Health Law (PHL), which authorizes the Public Health and Health Planning Council

(PHHPC), subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Health (Commissioner), to establish

and amend the State Sanitary Code (SSC) provisions related to any matters affecting the security

of life or health or the preservation and improvement of public health in the State of New York.

Additionally, Section 2103 of the PHL requires all local health officers to report cases of

communicable disease to the New York State Department of Health (Department).

       The statutory authority for the proposed amendments to section 405.3 of Title 10 of the

Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York is section 2803

of the PHL, which authorizes PHHPC to adopt and amend rules and regulations, subject to the

approval of the Commissioner, to implement the purposes and provisions of PHL Article 28, and

to establish minimum standards governing the operation of health care facilities.

       The statutory authority for the proposed new section 58-1.14 of Title 10 of the Official

Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York is section 576 of the

PHL, which authorizes the Department to adopt regulations prescribing the requirements for the

proper operation of a clinical laboratory, including the methods and the manner in which testing

or analyses of samples shall be performed and reports submitted.




                                                 8
Legislative Objectives:

       The legislative objective of PHL § 225 is, in part, to protect the public health by

authorizing PHHPC, with the approval of the Commissioner, to amend the SSC to address public

health issues related to communicable disease.

       The legislative objective of PHL § 2803 includes, among other objectives, authorizing

PHHPC, with the approval of the Commissioner, to adopt regulations concerning the operation

of facilities licensed pursuant to Article 28 of the PHL, including general hospitals.

       The legislative objective of PHL § 576 is, in part, to promote public health by

establishing minimum standards for clinical laboratory testing and reporting of test results,

including to the Department for purposes of taking prompt action to address outbreaks of

disease.

Needs and Benefits:

       These regulations update, clarify and strengthen the Department’s authority as well as

that of local health departments to take specific actions to monitor the spread of disease,

including actions related to investigation and response to a disease outbreak.

       The following is a summary of the amendments to the Department’s regulations:

       Part 2 Amendments:

           •   Amend sections 2.1 and 2.5 to reflect The World Health Organization’s (WHO)

               decision to change the name of “monkeypox” to “Mpox” in an effort to reduce the

               stigma that monkeypox comes with and deal with possible misinformation falsely

               suggesting that monkeys are the main source of spreading the virus.

           •   Repeal and replace current section 2.6, related to investigations, to clarify existing

               local health department authority.


                                                    9
    -   Sets forth specific actions that local health departments must take to investigate

        a case, suspected case, outbreak, or unusual disease.

    -   Requires individuals and entities subject to a public health investigation to

        cooperate with the Department and local health departments.

    -   While the Department works collaboratively with local health departments on a

        variety of public health issues, including disease control, this regulation clarifies

        the authority for the Commissioner to lead disease investigation activities under

        certain circumstances (i.e., where there is potential for statewide impact,

        multiple jurisdictions impacted, or impact on one or more New York State

        jurisdictions and another state or states), while working collaboratively with

        impacted local health departments. In all other situations, local health

        departments retain the primary authority and responsibility to control

        communicable disease within their respective jurisdictions, with the Department

        providing assistance as needed.

    -   Codify in regulation the requirement that local health departments send reports

        to the Department during an outbreak.

Part 405 Amendments

•   Mandates hospitals to report syndromic surveillance data during an outbreak of a

    highly contagious communicable disease.

•   Permits the Commissioner to direct hospitals to take patients during an outbreak of a

    highly contagious communicable disease, which is consistent with the federal

    Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA).

Part 58 Amendments


                                        10
        •   New section 58-1.14 added clarifying reporting requirements for certain

            communicable diseases

                -   Requires the Commissioner to designate those communicable diseases that

                    require prompt action, and to make available a list of such diseases on the

                    State Department of Health website.

                -   Requires clinical laboratories to immediately report positive test results for

                    communicable diseases identified as requiring prompt attention, in a manner

                    and format identified by the Commissioner.

                -   Requires clinical laboratories to report all test results, including negative and

                    indeterminate results, for communicable diseases identified as requiring

                    prompt attention, via the Electronic Clinical Laboratory Reporting System

                    (ECLRS).



COSTS:

Costs to Regulated Parties:

       Although there are costs associated with disease investigation and response for any

outbreak, these regulations clarify and strengthen the existing authorities and responsibilities of

local governments. As such, these regulations do not impose any substantial additional costs

beyond what local health departments would incur in the absence of these regulations.

       The requirement that hospitals submit syndromic surveillance reports when requested

during an outbreak is not expected to result in any substantial costs. Hospitals are already

regularly and voluntarily submitting data to the Department, and nearly all of them submit such

reports electronically. With regard to the Commissioner directing general hospitals to accept


                                                 11
patients during an outbreak of a highly contagious communicable disease, hospitals are already

required to adhere to the federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA).

Accordingly, both of these proposed amendments will not impose any substantial additional cost

to hospitals.

        Clinical laboratories must already report communicable disease testing results using the

ECLRS and must also immediately report communicable diseases pursuant to PHL § 2102. The

regulation simply clarifies existing requirements and is not anticipated to imposes any substantial

additional costs beyond those costs that laboratories would incur in the absence of these

regulations.


Costs to Local and State Governments:

        Although there are costs associated with disease investigation and response for any

outbreak, these regulations clarify and strengthen the existing authorities and responsibilities of

local governments. As such, these regulations do not impose any substantial additional costs

beyond what local health departments would incur in the absence of these regulations. Further,

making explicit the Department’s authority to lead investigation activities will result in increased

coordination of resources, likely resulting in a cost-savings for State and local governments.

        Any clinical laboratories operated by a local government must already report

communicable disease testing results using the ECLRS and must also immediately report

communicable diseases pursuant to PHL § 2102. The regulation simply clarifies existing

requirements and is not anticipated to imposes any substantial additional costs beyond those

costs that laboratories would incur in the absence of these regulations.




                                                 12
Paperwork:

       Some hospitals may be required to make additional syndromic surveillance reports that

they are not already making. Otherwise, these regulations do not require any additional

paperwork.



Local Government Mandates:

       Under existing regulation, local health departments already have the authority and

responsibility to take actions to control the spread of disease within their jurisdictions. The

proposed amendments clarify these existing authorities and duties.



Duplication:

       There is no duplication in existing State or federal law.



Alternatives:

       The alternative would be to leave in place the current regulations on disease

investigation. However, many of these regulatory provisions have not been updated in fifty

years and should be modernized to ensure appropriate response to a disease outbreak, such as

COVID-19.



Federal Standards:




                                                 13
       States and local governments have primary authority for controlling disease within their

respective jurisdictions. Accordingly, there are no federal statutes or regulations that apply to

disease control within NYS.

Compliance Schedule:

       These emergency regulations will become effective upon filing with the Department of

State and will expire, unless renewed, 90 days from the date of filing. As the COVID-19

pandemic is consistently and rapidly changing, it is not possible to determine the expected

duration of need at this point in time. The Department will continuously evaluate the expected

duration of these emergency regulations throughout the aforementioned 90-day effective period

in making determinations on the need for continuing this regulation on an emergency basis or

issuing a notice of proposed rulemaking for permanent adoption. This notice does not constitute

a notice of proposed or revised rule making for permanent adoption.


Contact Person:        Katherine Ceroalo
                       New York State Department of Health
                       Bureau of Program Counsel, Regulatory Affairs Unit
                       Corning Tower Building, Room 2438
                       Empire State Plaza
                       Albany, New York 12237
                       (518) 473-7488
                       (518) 473-2019 (FAX)
                       REGSQNA@health.ny.gov




                                                 14
                         REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS



Effect on Small Business and Local Government:

       Under existing regulation, local health departments already have the authority and

responsibility to take actions to control the spread of disease within their jurisdictions. The

proposed amendments clarify these existing authorities and duties.



Compliance Requirements:

       Under existing regulation, local health departments already have the authority and

responsibility to take actions to control the spread of disease within their jurisdictions. The

proposed amendments clarify these existing authorities and duties. With respect to mandating

syndromic surveillance reporting during an outbreak of a highly infectious communicable

disease, hospitals are already reporting syndromic surveillance data regularly and voluntarily.

With respect to clinical laboratories, they must already report communicable disease testing

results using the ECLRS and must also immediately report communicable diseases pursuant to

PHL § 2102. The regulation simply clarifies existing requirements and is not anticipated to

imposes any substantial additional costs beyond those costs that laboratories would incur in the

absence of these regulations.



Professional Services:

       It is not expected that any professional services will be needed to comply with this rule.




                                                 15
Compliance Costs:

       Although there are costs associated with disease investigation and response for any

outbreak, these regulations clarify and strengthen the existing authorities and responsibilities of

local governments. As such, these regulations do not impose any substantial additional costs

beyond what local health departments would incur in the absence of these regulations.

       Further, making explicit the Department’s authority to lead investigation activities will

result in increased coordination of resources, likely resulting in a cost-savings for State and local

governments.



Economic and Technological Feasibility:

       There are no economic or technological impediments to the rule changes.



Minimizing Adverse Impact:

       As the proposed regulations largely clarify existing responsibility and duties among

regulated entities and individuals, any adverse impacts are expected to be minimal. The

Department, however, will work with regulated entities to ensure they are aware of the new

regulations and have the information necessary to comply.



Small Business and Local Government Participation:

       Due to the emergent nature of COVID-19, small business and local governments were

not consulted. If these regulations are proposed for permanent adoption, all parties will have an

opportunity provided comments during the notice and comment period.




                                                 16
                         RURAL AREA FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS

Type and Estimated Numbers of Rural Areas:

       While this rule applies uniformly throughout the state, including rural areas, for the

purposes of this Rural Area Flexibility Analysis (RAFA), “rural area” means areas of the state

defined by Exec. Law § 481(7) (SAPA § 102(10)). Per Exec. Law § 481(7), rural areas are

defined as “counties within the state having less than two hundred thousand population, and the

municipalities, individuals, institutions, communities, and programs and such other entities or

resources found therein. In counties of two hundred thousand or greater population ‘rural areas’

means towns with population densities of one hundred fifty persons or less per square mile, and

the villages, individuals, institutions, communities, programs and such other entities or resources

as are found therein.”

       The following 44 counties have a population of less than 200,000 based upon 2020

United States Census data:


 Allegany County                  Greene County                    Schoharie County
 Broome County                    Hamilton County                  Schuyler County
 Cattaraugus County               Herkimer County                  Seneca County
 Cayuga County                    Jefferson County                 St. Lawrence County
 Chautauqua County                Lewis County                     Steuben County
 Chemung County                   Livingston County                Sullivan County
 Chenango County                  Madison County                   Tioga County
 Clinton County                   Montgomery County                Tompkins County
 Columbia County                  Ontario County                   Ulster County
 Cortland County                  Orleans County                   Warren County
 Delaware County                  Oswego County                    Washington County
 Essex County                     Otsego County                    Wayne County
 Franklin County                  Putnam County                    Wyoming County
 Fulton County                    Rensselaer County                Yates County
 Genesee County                   Schenectady County




                                                17
       The following counties of have population of 200,000 or greater, and towns with

population densities of 150 person or fewer per square mile, based upon the United States

Census estimated county populations for 2010:


 Albany County                    Monroe County                     Orange County
 Dutchess County                  Niagara County                    Saratoga County
 Erie County                      Oneida County                     Suffolk County
                                  Onondaga County

Reporting, Recordkeeping, and Other Compliance Requirements; and Professional

Services:

       As the proposed regulations largely clarify existing responsibilities and duties among

regulated entities and individuals, no additional recordkeeping, compliance requirements, or

professional services are expected. With respect to mandating syndromic surveillance reporting

during an outbreak of a highly infectious communicable disease, hospitals are already reporting

syndromic surveillance data regularly and voluntarily. Additionally, the requirement for local

health departments to continually report to the Department during an outbreak is historically a

practice that already occurs. With respect to clinical laboratories, they must already report

communicable disease testing results using the ECLRS and must also immediately report

communicable diseases pursuant to PHL § 2102.



Compliance Costs:

       As the proposed regulations largely clarify existing responsibility and duties among

regulated entities and individuals, no initial or annual capital costs of compliance are expected

above and beyond the cost of compliance for the requirements currently in Parts 2, 405 and 58.




                                                 18
Economic and Technological Feasibility:

       There are no economic or technological impediments to the rule changes.



Minimizing Adverse Impact:

       As the proposed regulations largely clarify existing responsibility and duties among

regulated entities and individuals, any adverse impacts are expected to be minimal. The

Department, however, will work with local health departments to ensure they are aware of the

new regulations and have the information necessary to comply.



Rural Area Participation:

       Due to the emergent nature of COVID-19, parties representing rural areas were not

consulted. If these regulations are proposed for permanent adoption, all parties will have an

opportunity provided comments during the notice and comment period.




                                                19
                         JOB IMPACT STATEMENT

       The Department of Health has determined that this regulatory change will not have a

substantial adverse impact on jobs and employment, based upon its nature and purpose.




                                              20
                              EMERGENCY JUSTIFICATION

       Where compliance with routine administrative procedures would be contrary to public

interest, the State Administrative Procedure Act (SAPA) § 202(6) empowers state agencies to

adopt emergency regulations necessary for the preservation of public health, safety, or general

welfare. In this case, compliance with SAPA for filing of this regulation on a non-emergency

basis, including the requirement for a period of time for public comment, cannot be met because

to do so would be detrimental to the health and safety of the general public.

       New York continues to experience significant community levels of COVID-19 disease

with very densely populated areas at “high” and many highly populated counties at “medium.”

New York still has a 7-day average of over 3,400 cases per day, and over 2,700 people in the

hospital affected by COVID each day. Regrettably, New York still averages 31 deaths per day

associated with COVID-19.

       Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus -2 (SARS-CoV2) still mutates,

although the current dominant strain is BQ1, a subvariant of Omicron, new more contagious

variants continue to emerge, with CH1 the latest to emerge in New York and the country. The

threat from emerging variants includes their unknown virulence affecting morbidity and

mortality. It is also unknown how well existing vaccines or pharmacotherapeutics will protect

against emerging variants.

       New York is currently experiencing widespread Influenza cases and hospitalizations.

Review of the Weekly Surveillance Report, week ending November 19, 2022 demonstrate this

increase. Influenza, (Flu), has multiple strains, currently, in New York, Flu A, H3 strain is more

common and has arrived much earlier than preceding years. Cases of Flu are increasing all over

the state with largest increases currently in the Western Region. The increase of Flu, along with



                                                21
COVID and other respiratory viruses has presented undue stress on the health care system in the

state.

         New York is also addressing the impact of Ebola Virus Disease, Sudan strain and the

impact on the country. New York is at higher risk, since although there are only 5 airports where

individuals from the affected area arrive in the United States, two of these airports (JFK and

Newark) are in the greater metropolitan New York area. At present, over 350 people have been

screened and over 50 people are being monitored; however, there are currently no active cases.

         Furthermore, as stated in the declaration of the State disaster emergency Executive Order

21, a polio outbreak has affected multiple counties in the State of New York, with one paralytic

case and detections of genetically related virus in six counties, indicating circulation and

transmission of the virus likely in hundreds of people.

         The emergency regulations are needed to continue requiring clinical laboratories to report

all test results, including negative and indeterminate results, for communicable diseases such as

COVID-19, polio and Ebola; mandate hospitals to report syndromic surveillance data; and

permit the Commissioner to direct hospitals to take patients during a disease outbreak such as

COVID-19 or Ebola.

         Based on the ongoing burden of multiple outbreaks seen across the state, the Department

has determined that these regulations are necessary to promulgate on an emergency basis to

control the spread of highly contagious communicable diseases in New York State.

Accordingly, current circumstances necessitate immediate action, and pursuant to the State

Administrative Procedure Act Section 206(6), a delay in the issuance of these emergency

regulations would be contrary to public interest.




                                                 22
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Public Health and Health Planning Council and the

Commissioner of Health by Sections 201, 206, and 225 of the Public Health Law, Title 10

(Health) of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York

is amended by adding a new Section 2.60, to be effective upon filing with the Secretary of State,

to read as follows:



Section 2.60 is added to read as follows:



2.60. Face Coverings for COVID-19 Prevention.



(a) As determined by the Commissioner based on COVID-19 incidence and prevalence, as well

as any other public health and/or clinical risk factors related to COVID-19 disease spread, any

person who is two years of age or older and able to medically tolerate a face-covering may be

required to cover their nose and mouth with a mask or face-covering when: (1) in a public place

and unable to maintain, or when not maintaining, physical distance; or (2) in certain settings as

determined by the Commissioner, which may include schools, public transit, homeless shelters,

correctional facilities, nursing homes, and health care settings, and which may distinguish

between individuals who are vaccinated against COVID-19 and those that are not vaccinated.

The Commissioner shall issue findings regarding the necessity of face-covering requirements at

the time such requirements are announced.

(b) Businesses must provide, at their expense, face-coverings for their employees required to

wear a mask or face-covering pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section.
(c) large-scale indoor event venues with more than five thousand attendees shall require patrons

to wear face coverings consistent with subdivision (a) of this section; may require all patrons to

wear a face covering irrespective of vaccination status; and may deny admittance to any person

who fails to comply. This regulation shall be applied in a manner consistent with the federal

Americans with Disabilities Act, New York State or New York City Human Rights Law, and

any other applicable provision of law.

(d) No business owner shall deny employment or services to or discriminate against any person

on the basis that such person elects to wear a face-covering that is designed to inhibit the

transmission of COVID-19, but that is not designed to otherwise obscure the identity of the

individual.

(e) For purposes of this section face-coverings shall include, but are not limited to, cloth masks,

surgical masks, and N-95 respirators that are worn to completely cover a person’s nose and

mouth.

(f) Penalities and enforcement.

   (i)        A violation of any provision of this Section is subject to all civil and criminal

              penalties as provided for by law. Individuals or entities that violate this Section are

              subject to a maximum fine of $1,000 for each violation. For purposes of civil

              penalties, each day that an entity operates in a manner inconsistent with the Section

              shall constitute a separate violation under this Section.

   (ii)       All local health officers shall take such steps as may be necessary to enforce the

              provisions of this Section accordance with the Public Health Law and this Title.




                                                    2
                           REGULATORY IMPACT STATEMENT

Statutory Authority:

       The statutory authority for adding a new Section 2.60 is sections 201, 206, and 225 of the

Public Health Law.



Legislative Objectives:

       The legislative objective of PHL § 201 includes authorizing the New York State

Department of Health (“Department”) to control and promote the control of communicable

diseases to reduce their spread. Likewise, the legislative objective of PHL § 206 includes

authorizing the Commissioner of Health to take cognizance of the interests of health and life of

the people of the state, and of all matters pertaining thereto and exercise the functions, powers

and duties of the department prescribed by law, including control of communicable diseases. The

legislative objective of Public Health Law § 225 is, in part, to protect the public health by

authorizing PHHPC, with the approval of the Commissioner, to amend the State Sanitary Code

to address public health issues related to communicable disease.



Needs and Benefits:

       The 2019 Coronavirus (COVID-19) is a disease that causes mild to severe respiratory and

other symptoms, including fever, cough, and difficulty breathing. People infected with COVID-

19 have had symptoms ranging from those that are mild (like a common cold) to severe

pneumonia that requires medical care in a general hospital and can be fatal, with a

disproportionate risk of severe illness for older adults, those who have serious underlying

medical health conditions and those who are unvaccinated.




                                                 3
       On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) designated the COVID-19

outbreak as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. On a national level, the

Secretary of Health and Human Services determined on January 31, 2020 that as a result of

confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the United States, a public health emergency existed and had

existed since January 27, 2020, nationwide. Thereafter, the situation rapidly evolved throughout

the world, with many countries, including the United States, quickly progressing from the

identification of travel-associated cases to person-to-person transmission among close contacts of

travel-associated cases, and finally to widespread community transmission of COVID-19.

       Now, more than two years after the first cases were identified in the United States

COVID-19 continues to impact New York State. Beyond the ongoing COVID-19 burden in

communities, certain settings such as nursing homes and health care settings, have been at

increased risk for transmission. These regulations provide that masking may be required under

certain circumstances, as determined by the Commissioner based on COVID-19 incidence and

prevalence, as well as any other public health and/or clinical risk factors related to COVID-19

disease spread. The regulations are necessary to permit flexibility to allow the Department to

quickly adapt to changing circumstances related to the spread of COVID-19 and increasing

transmission rates.



COSTS:

Costs to Regulated Parties:

As part of ongoing efforts to address COVID-19, regulated parties have been a partner in

implementing measures to limit the spread and/or mitigate the impact of COVID-19 within the




                                                4
state since March of 2020. Accordingly, this regulation does not impose additional costs to

regulated parties.



Costs to Local and State Governments:

       State and local government are authorized to enforce civil and criminal penalties related

to the violation of these regulations, and there may be some cost of enforcement, however such

costs are anticipated to be minimal as these provisions continue existing enforcement

requirements.



Paperwork:

       This regulation imposes no additional paperwork.



Local Government Mandates:

       As part of ongoing efforts to address COVID-19, local governments have been partners

in implementing and enforcing measures to limit the spread and/or mitigate the impact of

COVID-19 within their jurisdictions since March of 2020. Further, local governments have

separate authority and responsibilities to control disease within their jurisdictions pursuant to

PHL § 2100 and Part 2 of the State Sanitary Code.



Duplication:

       There is no duplication of federal law.




                                                  5
Alternatives:

       The alternative would be to not promulgate these emergency regulations. However, this

alternative was rejected, as the Department believes this regulation will facilitate the

Department’s ability to respond to the evolving nature of this serious and ongoing communicable

disease outbreak.



Federal Standards:

       States and local governments have primary authority for controlling disease within their

respective jurisdictions. Accordingly, there are no federal statutes or regulations that apply to

disease control within NYS.



Compliance Schedule:

       The regulations will become effective upon filing with the Department of State and will

expire, unless renewed, 60 days from the date of filing. As COVID-19 is consistently and rapidly

changing, it is not possible to determine the expected duration of need at this point in time. The

Department will continuously evaluate the expected duration of these emergency regulations

throughout the aforementioned 60-day effective period in making determinations on the need for

continuing this regulation on an emergency basis or issuing a notice of proposed ruling-making

for permanent adoption. This notice does not constitute a notice of proposed or revised rule

making for permanent adoption.




                                                  6
Contact Person:   Katherine Ceroalo
                  New York State Department of Health
                  Bureau of Program Counsel, Regulatory Affairs Unit
                  Corning Tower Building, Room 2438
                  Empire State Plaza
                  Albany, New York 12237
                  (518) 473-7488
                  (518) 473-2019 (FAX)
                  REGSQNA@health.ny.gov




                                          7
                         REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS


Effect on Small Business and Local Government:

       As part of ongoing efforts to address COVID-19, businesses and local government have

been a partner in implementing measures to limit the spread and/or mitigate the impact of

COVID-19 within the state since March of 2020. Accordingly, this regulation will not have a

significant impact on or cost to small business and local government.



Compliance Requirements:

       These regulations update previously filed emergency regulations to provide that masking

may be required under certain circumstances, as determined by the Commissioner based on

COVID-19 incidence and prevalence, as well as any other public health and/or clinical risk

factors related to COVID-19 disease spread.



Professional Services:

       It is not expected that any professional services will be needed to comply with this rule.



Compliance Costs:

       As part of ongoing efforts to address COVID-19, regulated parties have been a partner in

implementing measures to limit the spread and/or mitigate the impact of COVID-19 within the

state since March of 2020. Accordingly, this regulation will not have a significant impact.



Economic and Technological Feasibility:

       There are no economic or technological impediments to the rule changes.


                                                8
Minimizing Adverse Impact:

       As part of ongoing efforts to address COVID-19, regulated parties have been a partner in

implementing measures to limit the spread and/or mitigate the impact of COVID-19 within the

state since March of 2020. Accordingly, any adverse impacts are expected to be minimal.



Small Business and Local Government Participation:

       Due to the emergent nature of COVID-19, small business and local governments were

not consulted.




                                               9
                         RURAL AREA FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS

Type and Estimated Numbers of Rural Areas:

       While this rule applies uniformly throughout the state, including rural areas, for the

purposes of this Rural Area Flexibility Analysis (RAFA), “rural area” means areas of the state

defined by Exec. Law § 481(7) (SAPA § 102(10)). Per Exec. Law § 481(7), rural areas are

defined as “counties within the state having less than two hundred thousand population, and the

municipalities, individuals, institutions, communities, and programs and such other entities or

resources found therein. In counties of two hundred thousand or greater population ‘rural areas’

means towns with population densities of one hundred fifty persons or less per square mile, and

the villages, individuals, institutions, communities, programs and such other entities or resources

as are found therein.”

       The following 44 counties have an estimated population of less than 200,000 based upon

the 2019 United States Census county populations projections:

 Allegany County                   Greene County                    Schoharie County

 Broome County                     Hamilton County                  Schuyler County

 Cattaraugus County                Herkimer County                  Seneca County
 Cayuga County                     Jefferson County                 St. Lawrence County
 Chautauqua County                 Lewis County                     Steuben County
 Chemung County                    Livingston County                Sullivan County
 Chenango County                   Madison County                   Tioga County
 Clinton County                    Montgomery County                Tompkins County
 Columbia County                   Ontario County                   Ulster County
 Cortland County                   Orleans County                   Warren County
 Delaware County



                                                10
 Essex County                     Oswego County                   Washington County
 Franklin County                  Otsego County                   Wayne County
 Fulton County                    Putnam County                   Wyoming County
 Genesee County                   Rensselaer County               Yates County
                                  Schenectady County




       The following counties of have population of 200,000 or greater, and towns with

population densities of 150 person or fewer per square mile, based upon the 2019 United States

Census population projections:


 Albany County                    Niagara County                  Saratoga County

 Dutchess County                  Oneida County                   Suffolk County
 Erie County                      Onondaga County
 Monroe County                    Orange County




Reporting, recordkeeping, and other compliance requirements; and professional services:

       These regulations update previously filed emergency regulations to provide that masking

may be required under certain circumstances, as determined by the Commissioner based on

COVID-19 incidence and prevalence, as well as any other public health and/or clinical risk

factors related to COVID-19 disease spread.



Compliance Costs:

       As part of ongoing efforts to address COVID-19, regulated parties have been a partner in

implementing measures to limit the spread and/or mitigate the impact of COVID-19 within the



                                              11
state since March of 2020. Accordingly, this regulation does not impose additional costs to

regulated parties.



Economic and Technological Feasibility:

       There are no economic or technological impediments to the rule changes.



Minimizing Adverse Impact:

       As part of ongoing efforts to address COVID-19, regulated parties have been a partner in

implementing measures to limit the spread and/or mitigate the impact of COVID-19 within the

state since March of 2020. Accordingly, adverse impacts are expected to be minimal.



Rural Area Participation:

       Due to the emergent nature of COVID-19, parties representing rural areas were not

consulted.




                                               12
                                JOB IMPACT STATEMENT

       The Department of Health has determined that this regulatory change is necessary to

prevent further complete closure of the businesses impacted, and therefore, while there may be

lost revenue for many businesses, the public health impacts of continued spread of COVID-19

are much greater.




                                               13
                              EMERGENCY JUSTIFICATION

       The 2019 Coronavirus (COVID-19) is a disease that causes mild to severe respiratory and

other symptoms, including fever, cough, and difficulty breathing. People infected with COVID-

19 have had symptoms ranging from those that are mild (like a common cold) to severe

pneumonia that requires medical care in a general hospital and can be fatal, with a

disproportionate risk of severe illness for older adults and/or those who have serious underlying

medical health conditions.

       On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) designated the COVID-19

outbreak as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. On a national level, the

Secretary of Health and Human Services determined on January 31, 2020 that as a result of

confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the United States, a public health emergency existed and had

existed since January 27, 2020, nationwide. Thereafter, the situation rapidly evolved throughout

the world, with many countries, including the United States, quickly progressing from the

identification of travel-associated cases to person-to-person transmission among close contacts of

travel-associated cases, and finally to widespread community transmission of COVID-19.

       Now, more than two years after the first cases were identified in the United States, New

York continues to experience significant community levels of COVID-19 disease with very

densely populated areas at “high” and many highly populated counties at “medium.” New York

still has a 7-day average of over 3,400 cases per day, and over 2,700 people in the hospital

affected by COVID each day. Regrettably, New York still averages 31 deaths per day associated

with COVID-19. Beyond the ongoing COVID-19 burden in communities, certain settings such

as nursing homes and health care settings, have been at increased risk for transmission.




                                                14
       Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus -2 (SARS-CoV2) still mutates,

although the current dominant strain is BQ1, a subvariant of Omicron, new more contagious

variants continue to emerge, with CH1 the latest to emerge in New York and the country. The

threat from emerging variants includes their unknown virulence affecting morbidity and

mortality. It is also unknown how well existing vaccines or pharmacotherapeutics will protect

against emerging variants.

       To that end, these regulations provide that masking may be required under certain

circumstances, as determined by the Commissioner based on COVID-19 incidence and

prevalence, as well as any other public health and/or clinical risk factors related to COVID-19

disease spread. Based on the foregoing, the Department has determined that these emergency

regulations are necessary to permit flexibility to quickly adapt to changing circumstances and

increasing transmission rates and control the spread of COVID-19, necessitating immediate

action. Accordingly, pursuant to the State Administrative Procedure Act Section 202(6), a delay

in the issuance of these emergency regulations would be contrary to public interest.




                                               15
                               SUMMARY OF EXPRESS TERMS

This notice of proposed rulemaking amends 10 NYCRR Subpart 5-1 to include individual

maximum contaminant levels (MCL) of 0.0000100 mg/L or 10 parts per trillion (ppt) for

perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA) perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), perfluorohexane sulfonic acid

(PFHxS) and perfluorononanoic Acid (PFNA); includes a combined MCL of 0.0000300 mg/L or

30 ppt for PFDA, PFHpA, PFHxS, PFNA, perfluorooctanic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane

sulfonic acid (PFOS) referred to collectively as perfluoroalkyl substances-6 (PFAS6); and

establishes the first list of emerging contaminants (ECs) as well as notification levels for this list

of ECs in accordance with Public Health Law § 1112. New sections, subdivisions, paragraphs

and tables were added, and additional updates made to ensure clarity with implementation. This

regulation applies to all community water systems and all non-transient noncommunity water

systems.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Public Health and Health Planning Council and the

Commissioner of Health by sections 201, 225 and 1112 of the Public Health Law, Subpart 5-1 of

Title 10 (Health) of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of

New York is amended, to be effective April 1, 2023 for emerging contaminant monitoring,

notification levels, and changes to maximum contaminant level monitoring requirements for

perfluoroalkyl substances, and January 1, 2025 for maximum contaminant levels, to read as

follows:



Existing subdivisions (ai)-(bn), (bo) and (bp)-(dn) of section 5-1.1 are re-lettered to be

subdivisions (aj)-(bo), (bq) and (bs)-(dq), respectively. New subdivisions (ai), (bp), and (br) are

added to section 5-1.1 to read as follows:

(ai) Emerging Contaminant means any physical, chemical, microbiological or radiological

substance listed as an emerging contaminant pursuant to section 5-1.52 Table 3B of this Subpart.



(bp) Notification Level means the concentration level of an emerging contaminant in drinking

water that the Commissioner has determined, based on available scientific information, warrants

public notification and may require actions, which may include enhanced monitoring and

activities to reduce exposure, pursuant to section 5-1.102 of this Subpart.



(br) perfluoroalkyl substance-6 (PFAS6) means the sum of the concentration of

perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), perfluorononanonic acid

(PFNA), perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA), perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS) and

perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA).



                                                  2
                                           *       *       *

Subdivision 5-1.30(d) is modified to read as follows:

(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 5-1.12, 5-1.23, 5-1.51 or 5-1.77 of this

Subpart, if the public water system fails to comply with the treatment technique and/or the

monitoring requirements of subdivision (a), (b), (c) or (g) of this section, fails to install the

filtration and/or disinfection treatment required by this section or fails to comply with the

avoidance criteria requirements contained in subdivision (c) of this section, the system violates

this Subpart and shall make State and public notification, including any required mandatory

health effects language. Pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section, if at any time the raw water

turbidity exceeds five nephelometric turbidity units, the system shall consult with the State

within 24 hours of learning of the exceedance. Based on this consultation, the State may

determine that the exceedance constitutes a public health hazard, [as found]as defined in section

5-1.1[(bz)](cc)(4) of this Subpart, which requires a Tier 1 notification. When consultation does

not take place within the 24-hour period, the water system must distribute a Tier 1 notification no

later than 48 hours after the system learns of the violation. Ground water systems that are

required to provide 4-log virus treatment, surface water systems and ground water under the

direct influence of surface water (GWUDI) systems that use chemical disinfection must notify

the State whenever residual disinfectant levels in the water entering the distribution system are

less than the specified concentration pursuant to subdivisions (b) and (c) of this section. Any

water system that uses chemical disinfection must make State notification whenever disinfectant

residual levels entering the distribution system are not restored within four hours.

                                           *       *       *

Subdivision 5-1.51(a) is modified to read as follows:



                                                   3
(a) The maximum contaminant levels, maximum residual disinfectant levels, notification levels

and treatment technique requirements are listed in section 5-1.52 tables 1 through 7 of this

Subpart. In the case where an MCL, MRDL or treatment technique requirement is exceeded,

notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 5-1.12 of this Subpart, the supplier

of water will take the necessary steps to comply with this section, to ensure the protection of the

public health, including the undertaking of remedial feasibility studies and the installation of a

suitable treatment process. Compliance with the MCLs, MRDLs, notification levels and

treatment technique requirements shall be determined by the procedures contained in section 5-

1.52 tables 1 through 7 of this Subpart.



Subdivision 5-1.51(b) is modified to read as follows:

(b) The minimum monitoring requirements for each contaminant are listed in section 5-1.52

tables 8A through 12 and 15A of this Subpart. Unless otherwise specified, [except for]

monitoring at public water systems with fewer than 15 service connections and which serve

fewer than 25 persons, [where monitoring] will be at State discretion. For this section, State

discretion shall mean requiring monitoring when the State has reason to believe an MCL, MRDL

or treatment technique requirement has been violated, the potential exists for an MCL, MRDL or

treatment technique violation, a contaminant level is equal to or exceeds a notification level or a

contaminant may present a risk to public health.



Subdivision 5-1.51 (g) is amended to read as follows:

(g) Monitoring and reporting frequencies for specific contaminants may be established at State

discretion whenever the State believes that a potential exists for an MCL or MRDL violation, for



                                                   4
emerging contaminants at or above a notification level or a contaminant may present a risk to

public health.



A new subdivision (q) is added to section 5-1.51 as follows:

(q) The effective date of the PFAS6 MCL and the MCLs for PFNA, PFHxS, PFHpA and PFDA

in section 5-1.52 table 3 is April 1, 2023. The supplier of water must comply with all

requirements of this Subpart no later than January 1, 2025, except between April 1, 2023, and

December 31, 2024 the supplier of water shall comply with 5-1.78(d) and (e) of this Subpart

when an MCL is exceeded.



A new subdivision (r) is added to section 5-1.51 as follows:

(r) The Department, at its discretion, may provide financial assistance for compliance with the

monitoring requirements in section 5-1.52 table 9E, to any public water system serving fewer

than 10,000 persons upon showing that the costs associated with testing drinking water in

compliance with this section would impose a financial hardship.




                                                5
Section 5-1.52, Table 3 is amended to read as follows:

Table 3. Organic Chemicals Maximum Contaminant Level Determination
 Contaminants                           MCL           Type of water system       Determination of MCL violation
                                        (mg/L)
 General organic chemicals                            Community, NTNC and        If the results of a monitoring sample analysis exceed the MCL, the
  Principal organic contaminant (POC)   0.005         Transient                  supplier of water shall collect one to three more samples from the
  Unspecified organic contaminant (UOC) 0.05          [N]noncommunity            same sampling point, as soon as practical, but within 30 days. An
  Total POCs and UOCs                   0.1           (TNC)                      MCL violation occurs when at least one of the confirming samples is
                                                                                 positive1 and the average of the initial sample and all confirming
                                                                                 samples exceeds the MCL.

 Perfluoroalkyl substance-6 (PFAS6)6   0.0000300     Community, NTNC and         If the results of a monitoring sample analysis exceed the MCL for PFAS6
                                                     TNC                         as defined in Subdivision 5-1.1(br) of this Subpart, the supplier of water
                                                                                 shall collect one to three more samples from the same sampling point, as
                                                                                 soon as practical, but within 30 days. An MCL violation occurs when each
                                                                                 of the PFAS6 confirming samples is positive7 and the average of the initial
                                                                                 PFAS6 sample and all confirming samples exceeds the MCL.8

 Disinfection byproducts2,3                          Community and NTNC          For systems required to monitor quarterly, the results of all analyses
  Total trihalomethanes                0.080                                     at each monitoring location per quarter shall be arithmetically
  Haloacetic acids                     0.060                                     averaged and shall be reported to the State within 30 days of the
                                                                                 public water system’s receipt of the analyses. A violation occurs if
                                                                                 the average of the four most recent sets of quarterly samples at a
                                                                                 particular monitoring location (12-month locational running annual
                                                                                 average (LRAA)) exceeds the MCL. If a system collects more than
                                                                                 one sample per quarter at a monitoring location, the system shall
                                                                                 average all samples taken in the quarter at that location to determine
                                                                                 a quarterly average to be used in the LRAA calculation. If a system
                                                                                 fails to complete four consecutive quarters of monitoring, compliance
                                                                                 with the MCL will be based on an average of the available data from
                                                                                 the most recent four quarters. An MCL violation for systems on
                                                                                 annual or less frequent monitoring that have been increased to
                                                                                 quarterly monitoring as outlined in Table 9A, is determined after four
                                                                                 quarterly samples are taken.
                                                     Transient noncommunity      Not applicable.




                                                                             6
Table 3. Organic Chemicals Maximum Contaminant Level Determination (continued)
 Contaminants                          MCL            Type of water system                          Determination of MCL violation
                                       (mg/L)
 Specific Organic Chemicals                           Community, NTNC and      If the results of a monitoring sample analysis exceed the MCL, the
 Alachlor                              0.002          Transient                supplier of water shall collect one to three more samples from the same
 Aldicarb                              0.003          [N]noncommunity          sampling point, as soon as practical, but within 30 days. An MCL
 Aldicarb sulfone                      0.002                                   violation occurs when at least one of the confirming samples is positive1
 Aldicarb sulfoxide                    0.004                                   and the average of the initial sample and all confirming samples exceeds
 Atrazine 4
                                       0.003                                   the MCL.
 Benzo(a)pyrene                        0.0002
 Carbofuran                            0.04
 Chlordane                             0.002
 Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate             0.006
 Dibromochloropropane (DBCP)           0.0002
 2,4-D                                 0.05
 1,4-Dioxane                           0.0010
 Dinoseb                               0.007
 Diquat                                0.02
 Endrin                                0.002
 Ethylene dibromide (EDB)              0.00005
 Heptachlor                            0.0004
 Heptachlor epoxide                    0.0002
 Hexachlorobenzene                     0.001
 Lindane                               0.0002
 Methoxychlor                          0.04
 Methyl-tertiary-buty-ether(MTBE)      0.010
 Pentachlorophenol                     0.001
 Perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA)6        0.0000100
 Perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA)6      0.0000100
 Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS)6 0.0000100
 Perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA)6        0.0000100
 Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS)6  0.0000100
 Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)6        0.0000100
 Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)5     0.0005
 Propylene glycol                      1.0
 Simazine                              0.004
 Toxaphene                             0.003
 2,4,5-TP (Silvex)                     0.01
 2,3,7,8-TCDD (dioxin)                 0.00000003
 Vinyl chloride                        0.002
 1   A sample is considered positive when the quantity reported by the State approved laboratory is greater than or equal to the method detection limit.



                                                                                                              7
 2   For systems monitoring yearly or less frequently, the sample results for each monitoring location is considered the LRAA for that monitoring location. Systems required to conduct monitoring at a
     frequency that is less than quarterly shall monitor in the calendar month identified in the monitoring plan developed under section 5-1.51(c). Compliance calculations shall be made beginning with the
     first compliance sample taken after the compliance date.
 3   Systems that are demonstrating compliance with the avoidance criteria in section 5-1.30(c), shall comply with the TTHM and HAA5 LRAA MCLs; however the LRAA MCLs are not considered for
     avoidance purposes. For avoidance purposes, TTHMs and HAA5s are based on a running annual average of analyses from all monitoring locations.
 4   Syngenta Method AG–625, “Atrazine in Drinking Water by Immunoassay,” February 2001, available from Syngenta Crop Protection, Inc., 410 Swing Road, P.O. Box 18300, Greensboro, NC 27419.
     Telephone: 336–632–6000, may not be used for the analysis of atrazine in any system where chlorine dioxide is used for drinking water treatment. In samples from all other systems, any result for
     atrazine generated by Method AG–625 that is greater than one-half the maximum contaminant level (MCL) (in other words, greater than 0.0015mg/L or 1.5 μg/L) must be confirmed using another
     approved method for this contaminant and should use additional volume of the original sample collected for compliance monitoring. In instances where a result from Method AG–625 triggers such
     confirmatory testing, the confirmatory result is to be used to determine compliance
 5   If PCBs (as one of seven Aroclors) are detected in any sample analyzed using USEPA Method 505 or 508, the system shall reanalyze the sample using USEPA Method 508A to quantitate PCBs (as
     decachlorobiphenyl). Compliance with the PCB MCL shall be determined based upon the quantitative results of analyses using Method 508A.
 6   Monitoring, reporting and public notification requirements are effective April 1, 2023. The supplier of water shall comply with the MCL requirements by January 1, 2025.
 7   A sample is considered positive when the quantity reported by the State approved laboratory is greater than or equal to the method detection limit for any of the PFAS6 analytes.
 8   When averaging PFAS6 samples, each compound must be confirmed when performing the PFAS6 compliance calculation. Only results greater than or equal to the method detection limit can be used
     when calculating averages for each individual compound.


A new Table 3B is added to section 5-1.52 as follows

Table 3B. Emerging Contaminants – Notification Level Determination (Effective Date April 1, 2023)
 Contaminant1                                         Abbreviation Notification                          Notification Level Determination
                                                                     Level
                                                                     (mg/L)
 List 1
 Perfluorododecanoic acid                             PFDoA          0.0000300      If the sum of the concentration of these compounds in a monitoring
 Perfluoroundecanoic acid                             PFUnA                         sample is equal to or exceeds 0.0000300 mg/L, the supplier of water shall
 11-Chloroeicosafluoro-3-oxaundecane-1-sulfonic acid  11Cl-                         collect one to three more samples from the same sampling point, as soon
                                                      PF3OUdS                       as practical, but within 30 days. Public notification is required when at
 9-Chlorohexadecafluoro-3-oxanonane-1-sulfonic acid   9Cl-                          least one of the confirming samples is positive2 and the average of the
                                                      PF3ONS                        initial sample and all confirming samples is at or above a notification
 Hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer acid                 HFPO-DA                       level.3,4
                                                      (GenX)
 Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid                        PFHpS
 Perfluorobutanesulfonic acid                         PFBS           0.0001000      If the sum of the concentration of these compounds in a monitoring
 Perfluorohexanoic acid                               PFHxA                         sample is equal to or exceeds 0.0001000 mg/L, the supplier of water shall
 4,8-Dioxa-3H-perfluorononanoic acid                  ADONA                         collect one to three more samples from the same sampling point, as soon
 1H,1H, 2H, 2H-Perfluorohexane sulfonic acid          4:2FTS                        as practical, but within 30 days. Public notification is required when at
 1H,1H, 2H, 2H-Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid          6:2FTS                        least one of the confirming samples is positive2 and the average of the
 1H,1H, 2H, 2H-Perfluorodecane sulfonic acid          8:2FTS                        initial sample and all confirming samples is at or above a notification
 Nonafluoro-3,6-dioxaheptanoic acid                   NFDHA                         level.3
 Perfluorobutanoic acid                               PFBA
 Perfluoro (2-ethoxyethane) sulfonic acid             PFEESA
 Perfluoro-4-methoxybutanoic acid                     PFMBA
 Perfluoro-3-methoxypropanoic acid                    PFMPA
 Perfluoropentanoic acid                              PFPeA

                                                                                                              8
 Perfluoropentanesulfonic                                                 PFPeS
 1   Sample collection shall begin during the 3-year monitoring period starting April 1, 2023. Samples collected to satisfy the requirements of 40 CFR 141.140 shall satisfy the requirements of this Subpart,
     provided samples are collected in accordance with Appendix 5-C of this Subpart.
 2   A sample is considered positive when the quantity reported by the State approved laboratory is greater than or equal to the minimum reporting level established in 40 CFR 141.140 for any analyte on List
     1.
 3   When averaging emerging contaminant samples, each compound must be confirmed when performing the emerging contaminant notification level calculation. Only results greater than or equal to the
     minimum reporting level established in 40 CFR 141.140 may be used when calculating averages for each individual compound.
 4   Notification is required if the average concentration of HFPO-DA (GenX) is equal to or exceeds 0.000010 mg/L.

Section 5-1.52, Table 9C is repealed and replaced with a new Table 9C to read as follows:

Table 9C. Additional Organic Chemicals – Minimum Monitoring Requirements
                       Contaminant                         Type of water      Initial requirement                                        Continuing requirement              Continuing requirement
                                                               system                                                                      where detected1,2,3,4               where not detected1
 Synthetic Organic Compounds
 Alachlor                      Endothall                 Community and      Quarterly sample per                                         Quarterly                           One sample every
 Aldicarb                      Endrin                    Nontransient       source, for one year1,5                                                                          eighteen months per
 Aldicarb sulfone              Glyphosate                noncommunity                                                                                                        source6,7,8
 Aldicarb sulfoxide            Heptachlor                serving 3,300 or
 Aldrin                        Heptachlor epoxide        more persons.
 Atrazine                      Hexachlorobenzene
 Benzo(a)pyrene                Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
 Butachlor                     3-Hydroxycarbofuran
 Carbaryl                      Lindane
 Carbofuran                    Methomyl
 Chlordane                     Methoxychlor              Community and      Quarterly samples per                                        Quarterly                           Once per entry point
 Dalapon                       Metribuzin                Nontransient       entry point for one                                                                              every three years6,7,8
 Di(2-ethylhexyl) adipate      Oxamyl (vydate)           noncommunity       year6,7,8
 Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate    Pentachlorophenol         serving fewer than
 Dibromochloropropane          Picloram                  3,300 persons.
 Dicamba                       Polychlorinated byphenyls
 2,4-D                         Propachlor
 Dieldrin                      Simazine
 Dinoseb                       2,3,7,8-TCDD (Dioxin)
 1,4-Dioxane                   2,4,5-TP (Silvex)         Transient          State discretion9                                            State discretion9                   State discretion9
 Diquat                        Toxaphene                 noncommuity
                                                         excluding NTNC
 Perfluoroalkyl substances10
                                                         Community and      Quarterly samples per                                        Quarterly                           One sample every
 Perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA)                           nontransient       source for one year1,8,10                                                                        eighteen months per
 Perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA)                         noncommunity                                                                                                        source6,7,8
 Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS)                    serving 3,300 or
 Perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA)                           more persons


                                                                                                             9
Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS)                                         Community and               Quarterly samples per              Quarterly                            Once per entry point
Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)                                               Nontransient                source for one year1,8,10                                               every three years6,7,8
                                                                            noncommunity
                                                                            serving fewer than
                                                                            3,300 persons
                                                                            Community                   State discretion                   State discretion9                    State discretion9
                                                                            serving fewer than
                                                                            15 service
                                                                            connections or 25
                                                                            persons
                                                                            Transient                   State discretion9                  State discretion9                    State discretion9
                                                                            noncommunity
1    The location for sampling of each ground water source of supply shall be representative of each source between the individual well and at or before the first service connection and before mixing with
     other sources, unless otherwise specified by the State to be at the entry point. Public water systems which take water from a surface water body or watercourse shall sample at points in the distribution
     system representative of each source or at entry point or points to the distribution system after any water treatment plant.
2    The State may decrease the quarterly monitoring requirement to annually provided that system is reliably and consistently below the MCL based on a minimum of two quarterly samples from a ground
     water source and four quarterly samples from a surface water source. Systems which monitor annually must monitor during the quarter that previously yielded the highest analytical result. Systems
     serving fewer than 3,300 persons and which have three consecutive annual samples without detection may apply to the State for a waiver in accordance with footnote 6.
3    If a contaminant is detected, repeat analysis must include all analytes contained in the approved analytical method for the detected contaminant.
4    Detected as used in the table shall be defined as reported by the State approved laboratory to be greater than or equal to the method detection limit.
5    The State may allow a system to postpone monitoring for a maximum of two years, if an approved laboratory is not reasonably available to do a required analysis within the scheduled monitoring
     period.
6    The State may waive the monitoring requirement for a public water system that submits information every three years to demonstrate that a contaminant or contaminants was not used, transported,
     stored or disposed within the watershed or zone of influence of the system.
7    The State may reduce the monitoring requirement for a public water system that submits information every three years to demonstrate that the public water system is invulnerable to contamination. If
     previous use of the contaminant is unknown or it has been used previously, then the following factors shall be used to determine whether a waiver is granted.
     a. Previous analytical results.
     b. The proximity of the system to a potential point or nonpoint source of contamination. Point sources include spills and leaks of chemicals at or near a water treatment facility or at manufacturing,
     distribution, or storage facilities, or from hazardous and municipal waste landfills and other waste handling or treatment facilities. Nonpoint sources include the use of pesticides to control insect and
     weed pests on agricultural areas, forest lands, home and gardens, and other land application uses.
     c. The environmental persistence and transport of the pesticide, PCBs, PFAS6 or 1,4-dioxane.
     d. How well the water source is protected against contamination due to such factors as depth of the well and the type of soil and the integrity of the well casing.
     e. Elevated nitrate levels at the water supply source.
     f. Use of PCBs in equipment used in production, storage or distribution of water.
8    The State may allow systems to composite samples in accordance with the conditions in Appendix 5-C of this Title.
9    State discretion shall mean requiring monitoring when the State has reason to believe the MCL has been violated, the potential exists for an MCL violation, emerging contaminants are at or above the
     notification level or the contaminant may present a risk to public health.
10   All samples must be analyzed using USEPA method 533: Determination of Per- and Polyfluoroalklyl Substances in Drinking Water by Isotope Dilution Anion Exchange Solid Phase Extraction and
     Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry or USEPA method 537.1: Determination of Selected Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Drinking Water by Solid Phase Extraction and Liquid
     Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS/MS). All compounds analyzed shall be reported to the State along with all pertinent information from the laboratory performing the analysis.
     Failure to report all compounds in the approved analytical method is a monitoring and reporting violation. All PFAS results are subject to the Department’s review. Invalidated results shall not be used
     in determining compliance with the MCLs. If a sample is invalidated, the supplier of water shall collect and analyze a replacement sample.




                                                                                                             10
A new Table 9E is added to section 5-1.52 as follows:
Table 9E. Emerging Contaminants – Minimum monitoring requirements
 Contaminant1                                         Abbreviation                                         Type of Water System              Initial Requirement3              Continuing
                                                                                                                                                                               requirement at or
                                                                                                                                                                               above Notification
                                                                                                                                                                               Level4
 List 1 (Effective date April 1, 2023)
 Perfluorododecanoic acid                                                PFDoA                             Community water                   One sample per entry              One sample per entry
 Perfluoroundecanoic acid                                                PFUnA                             system serving 25 or              point.2                           point per year.
 11-Chloroeicosafluoro-3-oxaundecane-1-sulfonic acid                     11Cl-PF3OUdS                      more persons.
 9-Chlorohexadecafluoro-3-oxanonane-1-sulfonic acid                      9Cl-PF3ONS
 Hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer acid                                    HFPO-DA (GenX)
 Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid                                           PFHpS                             Community water                   One sample per entry              One sample per entry
 Perfluorobutanesulfonic acid                                            PFBS                              system serving fewer              point.5                           point per year.5
 Perfluorohexanoic acid                                                  PFHxA                             than 25 persons.
 4,8-Dioxa-3H-perfluorononanoic acid                                     ADONA
 1H,1H, 2H, 2H-Perfluorohexane sulfonic acid                             4:2FTS
 1H,1H, 2H, 2H-Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid                             6:2FTS
 1H,1H, 2H, 2H-Perfluorodecane sulfonic acid                             8:2FTS                            Nontransient                      One sample per entry              One sample per entry
 Nonafluoro-3,6-dioxaheptanoic acid                                      NFDHA                             noncommunity water                point.                            point per year.
 Perfluorobutanoic acid                                                  PFBA                              systems.
 Perfluoro (2-ethoxyethane) sulfonic acid                                PFEESA
 Perfluoro-4-methoxybutanoic acid                                        PFMBA
 Perfluoro-3-methoxypropanoic acid                                       PFMPA
 Perfluoropentanoic acid                                                 PFPeA
 Perfluoropentanesulfonic                                                PFPeS
 1   Every covered public water system shall monitor drinking water for the presence of emerging contaminants within three years of the List effective date.
 2   Public water systems that are required to monitor in accordance with 40 CFR sections 141.40-141.42 (UCMR) shall submit all sample results to the Department.
 3   The supplier of water shall notify the Department within 24-hours of receiving confirmed sample results at or above the NL.
 4   If sampling confirms that contaminants are present at or above the notification level during initial monitoring, subsequent confirmation samples are not needed during required continuing monitoring.
 5   Results for PFAS6 must also be reported, and compliance determination made in accordance with table 3A.




                                                                                                           11
Section 5-1.52 Table 13 has been amended to read as follows:
Table 13 – REQUIRED NOTIFICATIONS
 Contaminant/Situation                                                       Single sample        MCL/MRDL/TT1            Failure to meet monitoring
 (Subpart 5-1 citations                                                      exceeds              Violation and other     requirements and/or failure to
                                                                             MCL/MRDL1            notification            use applicable testing procedure
                                                                                                  requirements
 Public Health Hazard (Section 5-1.1(bz))2                                   Not applicable       State                   State
                                                                                                  Tier 1                  Tier 1
 Escherichia coli (E. coli) in distribution system (Section 5-1.52,          State3               State                   State
 Tables 6, 11 and 11B)                                                       Not applicable, or   Tier 1                  Tier 3, or Tier 15
                                                                             Tier 14
 Total coliform in distribution system (Section 5-1.52, Tables 6, 11         Not applicable       State8                  State
 and 11B)                                                                                         Tier 2, or Tier 19      Tier 3, or Tier 2 as directed by State
 Entry Point Turbidity monthly average (Section 5-1.52, Tables 4 and         State10              State                   State
 10)                                                                                              Tier 2                  Tier 3
 Entry Point Turbidity two-day average (Section 5-1.52, Tables 4 and         State                State                   State
 10)                                                                                              Tier 2, or Tier 111     Tier 3
 Raw Water Turbidity (Subdivision 5-1.30(d) and Section 5-1.52,              State                State                   State
 Table 10A)                                                                                       Tier 2, or Tier 111     Tier 3
 Filtered Water Turbidity Single exceedance of the maximum                   State                State                   State
 allowable Turbidity level (Section 5-1.52, Tables 4A and 10A)                                    Tier 2, or Tier 111     Tier 3
 Filtered Water Turbidity Treatment Technique violation (Section 5-          Not applicable       State                   State
 1.52, Tables 4A and 10A)                                                                         Tier 2                  Tier 3
 Distribution Point Turbidity (Section 5-1.52, Tables 5, 10 and 10A)         Not applicable       State                   State
                                                                                                  Tier 2                  Tier 3
 Treatment Technique violations other than turbidity12,13 (Sections 5-       Not applicable       State                   State
 1.12, 5-1.30, 5-1.32, 5-1.81, and 5-1.83 and Subdivision 5-1.71(d))                              Tier 2, or Tier 12,13   Tier 313, or Tier 212
 Free chlorine residual less than 0.2 mg/L at the entry point14              Not applicable       State                   Not applicable
 (Subdivision 5-1.30(d))
 Free chlorine residual less than required minimum for a ground water        Not applicable       State                   Tier 2
 system or ground water source required to provide 4-log virus                                    Tier 2, or Tier 19
 treatment15 (Subdivision 5-1.30(a))
 Inorganic chemicals and physical characteristics listed in Tables 8A        State                State                   State
 and 8B (Section 5-1.52, Tables 1, 8A, and 8B)                                                    Tier 2                  Tier 3
 Chloride, iron, manganese, silver, sulfate, and zinc (Section 5-1.52,       Not applicable       State                   State
 Tables 1 and 8D)                                                                                 Tier 3                  Tier 3
 Sodium (Section 5-1.52, Tables 1 and 8D)                                    State if the level   Tier 2 if the level     Tier 3
                                                                             exceeds 20 mg/L      exceeds 270 mg/L
 Nitrate, Nitrite, Total Nitrate and Nitrite (Section 5-1.52, Tables 2 and   State                State                   State
 8C)                                                                                              Tier 1                  Tier 1, or Tier 316
 Lead and Copper (Sections 5-1.40 to 1.48)                                   Not applicable       State                   State

                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                Tier 2                             Tier 3
Organic Chemicals [Group 1 and 2] (Section 5-1.52, Table 9C)                                 State                              State                              State
                                                                                                                                Tier 2                             Tier 3
Principal Organic Contaminants Unspecified Organic Contaminants                              State                              State                              State
Total POCs and UOCs                                                                                                             Tier 2                             Tier 3
(Section 5-1.52, Tables 3, 9B and 9D)
Radiological Contaminants (Section 5-1.52, Tables 7 and 12)                                  State                              State                              State
                                                                                                                                Tier 2                             Tier 3
Monitoring and Control of Disinfection Byproduct Precursors                                  Not applicable                     State                              State
(Sections 5-1.60 to 5-1.64)                                                                                                     Tier 2                             Tier 3
Disinfectant residuals Chlorine and Chloramine (Section 5-1.52,                              State                              State                              State
Tables 3A and 15A)                                                                                                              Tier 2                             Tier 3
Disinfectant residual Chlorine dioxide at entry point (Section 5-1.52,                       State                              State                              State
Tables 3A, 15 and 15A)                                                                                                          Tier 2                             Tier 3, or Tier 217
Disinfectant residual Chlorine dioxide in distribution system (Section                       State                              State                              State
5-1.52, Tables 3A, 15 and 15A)                                                                                                  Tier 118                           Tier 118
Disinfection byproducts Trihalomethanes Haloacetic acids (Section 5-                         Not applicable                     State                              State
1.52, Tables 3 and 9A) and Bromate and Chlorite (Section 5-1.52,                                                                Tier 2                             Tier 3
Tables 1 and 8B)
Acrylamide and Epichlorohydrin (Subdivision 5-1.51(m))                                       Not applicable                     State                              Not applicable
                                                                                                                                Tier 2
Operation under a variance, exemption or deferral (Sections 5-1.90 to                        Not applicable                     Tier 3                             Not applicable
5-1.96 and section 5-1.51(p))
Violation of conditions of a variance, exemption or deferral (Sections                       Not applicable                     State                              Not applicable
5-1.90 to 5-1.96 and section 5-1.51(p))                                                                                         Tier 2
Disruption of water service of four hours or more (Subdivision 5-                            Not applicable                     State19                            Not applicable
1.23(b))
Emerging contaminants confirmed at or above the notification level                           State8                             State                              State
                                                                                                                                Other20                            Tier 3
1   MCL – maximum contaminant level, MRDL – maximum residual disinfectant level, TT-treatment technique
2   Community systems must describe in their annual water supply statement (see section 5-1.72(e) and (f)) any Public Health Hazard that is determined to be a violation, and any uncorrected significant
    deficiency, and must indicate whether corrective action has been completed. This notice must be repeated every year until the annual report documents that corrective action has been completed in
    accordance with section 5-1.22 of this Subpart.
3   State notification must be made by the supplier of water within 24 hours of learning of an E. Coli positive sample
4   Public notification normally does not have to be issued for an E. Coli positive sample prior to the results of repeat samples. However, there may be situations where the State determines that a Tier 1
    notification is necessary to protect public health. The supplier of water must provide the Tier 1 notification no later than 24 hours after learning of the State’s determination.
5   Failure to test for E. Coli requires a Tier 1 notification if testing is not performed after any repeat sample tests positive for coliform. All other E. coli monitoring and testing procedure violations require
    Tier 3 notification.
6   At a ground water system, Tier 1 notification is required after initial detection of E. coli or other fecal indicator in raw source water, if the system does not provide 4-log virus treatment and process
    compliance monitoring. Confirmation of E. coli or other fecal indicator in the source water requires Tier 1 notification. Failure to take confirmatory samples may be a public health hazard requiring Tier
    1 notification.
7   Notice of the fecal indicator positive raw water sample must be made in the annual water supply statement (see section 5-1.72(e)), until the annual report documents that corrective action has been
    completed.
8   State notification must be made by the supplier of water within 24 hours of learning of the violation or emerging contaminants at or above the notification level.

                                                                                                               13
9    Tier 2 notification is normally required; however, there may be situations where the State determines that a Tier 1 notification is necessary to protect the public health. The supplier of water must
     provide the Tier 1 notification no later than 24 hours after learning of the State's determination.
10   If the daily entry point analysis exceeds one NTU, a repeat sample must be taken as soon as practicable, and preferably within one hour. If the repeat sample exceeds one NTU, the supplier of water
     must make state notification.
11   Systems must consult with the State within 24 hours after learning of the violation. Based on this consultation, the State may subsequently decide to elevate the violation from a Tier 2 to a Tier 1
     notification. If consultation does not take place within the 24-hour period, the water system must distribute a Tier 1 notification no later than 48 hours after the system learns of the violation.
12   These violations include the following: failure to comply with the treatment technique or monitoring requirements in section 5-1.30(a), (b), (c), and (g) of this Subpart; failure to comply with the
     avoidance criteria in section 5-1.30(c) of this Subpart; failure to cover a finished water storage facility or treat its discharge required in section 5-1.32 of this Subpart; failure to report to the state
     information required in section 5-1.72(c)(3) of this Subpart; failure to maintain records required in section 5-1.72(d)(7) of this Subpart; and failure to meet the treatment and bin classification
     requirements associated with Cryptosporidium in section 5-1.83 of this Subpart. Failure to collect three or more samples for Cryptosporidium analysis as required in section 5-1.81 of this Subpart is a
     Tier 2 violation requiring public notification. Failure to perform any other monitoring and testing procedure as required in section 5-1.81 of this Subpart is a Tier 3 violation.
13   Any significant deficiency that is not corrected, or where correction has not begun according to a State-approved corrective action plan within 120 days, or as directed by the State, is a TTV and must be
     addressed in accordance with section 5-1.12. If the deficiency is a public health hazard, the deficiency must be addressed as directed by the State and Tier 1 notification is required.
14   Applies to systems that have surface water or groundwater directly influenced by surface water as a source and use chlorine. The system must make State notification whether the residual was restored
     to at least 0.2 mg/L within four hours.
15   Required minimum chlorine residual at point that demonstrates adequate CT for disinfected water from ground water sources at first customer.
16   Failure to take a confirmation sample within 24 hours for nitrate or nitrite after an initial sample exceeds the MCL requires a Tier 1 notification. Other monitoring violations for nitrate or nitrite require a
     Tier 3 notification.
17   Failure to monitor for chlorine dioxide at the entrance to the distribution system the day after exceeding the MRDL at the entrance to the distribution system requires a Tier 2 notification. Other
     monitoring violations for chlorine dioxide at the entrance to the distribution system require a Tier 3 notification.
18   If any daily sample taken at the entrance to the distribution system exceeds the MRDL for chlorine dioxide and one or more samples taken in the distribution system the next day exceed the MRDL,
     Tier 1 notification is required. Failure to take the required samples in the distribution system the day after the MRDL is exceeded at the entry point also triggers Tier 1 notification.
19   Tier 1 notification is required if the situation meets the definition of a public health hazard.
20   Whenever one or more emerging contaminants is confirmed to be present in drinking water at concentrations at or above a notification level, the supplier of water for community and nontransient
     noncommunity water systems must provide public notification to owners of real property no later than ninety days after the system learns of samples at or above the notification level in accordance with
     paragraph 5-1.78(f) of this Subpart.




                                                                                                     *           *          *




                                                                                                                14
Section 5-1.70 is amended as follows:

5-1.70 Applicability. Sections 5-1.70 through 5-1.79 of this Subpart shall be applicable to all

public water systems, provided the systems serve 15 or more service connections or serve 25 or

more persons. Subdivisions 5-1.71 (c) and (d), subdivision 5-1.72 (c), [and] paragraph 5-1.78(a)

(4), paragraph 5-1.78(b) (3), and subdivision 5-1.78 (f) of this [Part]Subpart apply to all public

water systems.



Subdivision (f) of section 5-1.72 is amended to read as follows:

(f) The report shall contain such information as is required in this subdivision and any additional

information required by the State, except that paragraph [(7)](8) and subparagraphs

[(13)](14)(vii) through (xi) of this subdivision shall not apply to systems serving fewer than

1,000 service connections. The information required to be included in the report is described

below.

                                         *       *       *

(5) Definitions for emerging contaminant and notification level. Each report must include the

definitions set forth using the following language:

(i) Emerging Contaminant (EC). Any physical, chemical, microbiological or radiological

substance listed as an emerging contaminant pursuant to 10 NYCRR Part 5, Subpart 5-1, Section

5-1.52 Table 3B that does not have a MCL listed in accordance with 10 NYCRR Part 5, Subpart

5-1, Section 5-1.52 Table 3.

(ii) Notification Level (NL). The concentration level of an emerging contaminant in drinking

water that the Commissioner has determined, based on available scientific information, warrants




                                                 15
public notification and may require actions, which may include enhanced monitoring and

activities to reduce exposure.



[(5)] (6) Information on detected contaminants from sampling used to determine compliance. For

the purpose of this subdivision (except Cryptosporidium, Giardia and radon monitoring),

detected means: at or above the contaminant's method detection limit (MDL), as defined in

section 5-1.1[(bl)](bm) of this Subpart, or as prescribed by the State. Any contaminants specified

in sections 5-l.41 (lead and copper) and 5-1.51 of this Subpart and section 5-1.52 tables 8A, 8B,

8C, 8D, 9A, 9B, 9C, 9D, 9E, 10, 10A, 11, 11A, 11B, 12, 16 and 17 of this Subpart that are

detected during compliance monitoring shall be displayed in one table or in several adjacent

tables. Additionally, the report shall include detected monitoring results for samples collected

and analyzed by the State and/or detected monitoring results of additional samples required by

the State. If a system is allowed to monitor for specific contaminants less often than once a year,

the table shall include the date and results of the most recent sampling and the report shall

include a brief statement indicating that the data presented in the report are from the most recent

testing done in accordance with the regulations. No data older than five years need be included.

For the contaminants listed in section 5-1.52 tables 8A, 8B, 8C, 8D, 9A, 9B, 9C, 9D, 10, 10A,

11, 11B, 12, 16 and 17 of this Subpart the table(s) shall contain:

                                         *       *       *

Existing paragraphs (6) – (17) of subdivision 5-1.72(f) are renumbered to paragraphs (7) – (18)

and new paragraph (19) is added to read as follows:

(19) Any contaminants listed in section 5-1.52 Table 3B of this Subpart that are detected during

monitoring shall be displayed in one table or in several adjacent tables. Additionally, the report



                                                 16
shall include detected monitoring results for samples collected and analyzed by the State and/or

detected monitoring results of additional samples required by the State. The table shall include

the date and results of the most recent sampling and the report shall include a brief statement

indicating that the data presented in the report are from the most recent testing done in

accordance with the regulations. For the contaminants listed in section 5-1.52 Table 3B of this

Subpart, the table(s) shall contain:

(i) the notification level for that contaminant expressed as a number equal to or greater than 1.0;

(ii) the highest contaminant level detected and the range of detected levels.



Subparagraph 5-1.72(g)(1)(v) is amended to read as follows:

(v) If a supplement is prepared in accordance with paragraph (f)[(7)](8) of this section, the report

must contain a statement that describes that the analytical results for source water samples not

used to determine compliance are contained in a supplement and that the supplement is available

to the customer on request. The supplement shall also be:



Paragraph 5-1.72(h)(5) is amended to read as follows:

(5) A community water system that sells water to another community water system, must deliver

the applicable information required in paragraphs (f)(1), [(5)](6)-[(10)](11) and [(13)](14) of this

section to the buyer system:



Subdivision 5-1.74(c) is amended to read as follows:

(c)The owner of a water system shall ensure that all analyses performed by the [approved]

environmental laboratory [performing the analyses sends laboratory results to the department]



                                                 17
certified in accordance with Subpart 55-2 of this title, are sent to the State [department]

electronically in a manner prescribed by the department.



Subdivisions (a) and (b) of section 5-1.77 are amended to read as follows:

(a) The supplier of water shall make State notification within 24 hours of learning of the

existence or potential existence of a public health hazard, analytical results that are equal to or

exceed a notification level, or within 48 hours for any other violation or situation that may pose a

risk to public health. Section 5-1.52 Table 13 of this Subpart lists violations and situations that

require State notification.

(b) The information provided in a State notification shall include, but not be limited to, the

following:

(1) a description of the violation, notification level or situation, including the contaminant(s) of

concern, and (as applicable) the contaminant level;

(2) when the violation, notification level or situation occurred;

(3) what the system is doing to correct the violation, notification level or situation; and

(4) as applicable, when the water system expects to return to compliance.



Subdivision 5-1.78(a) has been amended to read as follows:

(a) General public notification requirements. Each owner or operator of a public water system

must provide public notification for public health hazards, and for all MCL, MRDL, treatment

technique, monitoring and testing procedure violations, emerging contaminants at or above the

notification level and for other situations posing a risk to public health. Public notification

requirements are divided into three tiers to take into account the seriousness of the violation or



                                                  18
situation and any potential adverse health effects that may be involved. The form, manner,

frequency, and other requirements for each tier and notification requirements for emerging

contaminants at or above the notification level are described in subdivisions (c)-[(e)](h) of this

section. Section 5-1.52 table 13 of this Subpart lists the required public notification (Tier 1, Tier

2,[ or] Tier 3 or notification requirements for emerging contaminants) for specific violations and

other situations posing a risk to public health.



Subdivision (b) of section 5-1.78 is amended to read as follows:

(b) Content, presentation, and standard language requirements for all public notifications.

                                          *        *      *

(3) When a public water system confirms one or more emerging contaminants is present in

drinking water at or above the notification level, the public notice must contain the following

elements:

(i) a description of emerging contaminants and notification levels, including the contaminants of

concern, and the contaminant level;

(ii) when the samples were collected;

(iii) available health effects information as provided by the Department;

(iv) any actions required by the Department, which may include enhanced monitoring and

activities to reduce exposure;

(v) the phone number of the water system owner, operator, or designee of the public water

system as a source of additional information concerning the notice; and

(vi) the phone number of the county or district health department which has jurisdiction over the

water system.



                                                   19
[(3)](4) Notice presentation. Each public notice required by this section:

                                         *         *    *

[(4)](5) Standard Language.

                                         *         *    *



A new subdivision (f) is added to section 5-1.78 and existing subdivisions (f) – (h) are amended

to read as follows:

(f) Notification requirements for emerging contaminants

(1) Whenever one or more emerging contaminants is confirmed to be present in drinking water at

concentrations at or above a notification level, the supplier of water for community and

nontransient noncommunity water systems must provide public notification to owners of real

property no later than ninety days after the system learns of samples at or above the notification

level.

(2) The supplier of water may use a single public notice for multiple violations, emerging

contaminants confirmed to be at or above the notification level or situations that require public

notification, as long as the timing requirements of paragraph (1) of this subdivision are met.

Community water systems may use the Annual Water Supply Statement (report) (see section 5-

1.72(e)-(h) of this Subpart) to provide public notice about emerging contaminants confirmed to

be at or above the notification level as long as the requirements of paragraph (1) are met.

(3) The supplier of water must provide public notices in a form and manner reasonably expected

to reach all persons served by the water system.

(i) Community water systems must provide notice by mail or other delivery method(s) approved

by the Department to each customer receiving a bill, and to other service connections to which



                                                20
water is delivered by the public water system; and by any other method reasonably expected to

reach other persons served by the system.

(ii) Unless directed otherwise by the State in writing, noncommunity water systems must provide

notice by posting the notice in conspicuous locations, and by any other method(s) reasonably

expected to reach other persons served by the system if they would not normally be reached by

posting.

[(f)](g) Notice to new billing units or new customers. Community water systems must give a

copy of the most recent public notice for any continuing violation, the existence of a variance or

exemption, emerging contaminants at or above the notification level or other ongoing situations

requiring a public notice to all new billing units or new customers prior to or at the time service

begins.

[(g)](h) Information on unregulated contaminants.

                                          *        *     *

[(h)](i) Notice by the State on behalf of the public water system.

                                          *        *     *



Subdivision (d) of section 5-1.91 is amended to read as follows:

(d) The technologies listed in this section are the best technology, treatment techniques, or other

means available for achieving compliance with the maximum contaminant levels for organic

chemicals listed in section 5-1.52 table 3 of this Subpart:

              Contaminant                               Best Available Technologies
 Alachlor                                     PTA1                 GAC2                 OX3
 Aldicarb                                                            X
 Aldicarb sulfone                                                    X
 Aldicarb sulfoxide                                                  X
 Atrazine                                                            X
 Benzene                                       X                     X


                                                   21
Benzo(a)pyrene                                                                                  X
Carbofuran                                                                                      X
Carbon tetrachloride                                             X                              X
Chlordane                                                                                       X
Dalapon                                                                                         X
Di(2-ethylhexyl)adipate                                          X                              X
Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate                                                                       X
Dibromochloropropane                                             X                              X
1,1-Dichloroethylene                                             X                              X
para-Dichlorobenzene                                             X                              X
o-Dichlorobenzene                                                X                              X
1,2-Dichloroethane                                               X                              X
cis-1,2-Dichloroethylene                                         X                              X
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene                                       X                              X
Dichloromethane                                                  X
1,2-Dichloropropane                                              X                              X
Dinsoeb                                                                                         X
1,4-Dioxane                                                                                                                   X
Endothal                                                                                        X
Endrin                                                                                          X
Ethylbenzene                                                     X                              X
Ethylene dibromide                                               X                              X
Glyphosate                                                                                                                    X
Heptachlor                                                                                      X
Heptachlor epoxide                                                                              X
Hexachlorobenzene                                                                               X
Hexachlorocyclopentadiene                                        X                              X
Lindane                                                                                         X
Methoxychlor                                                                                    X
Monochlorobenzene                                                X                              X
Oxamyl (Vydate)                                                                                 X
PCBs                                                                                            X
Pentachlorophenol                                                                               X
PFAS6                                                                                           X
Picloram                                                                                        X
Simazine                                                                                        X
Styrene                                                          X                              X
2,3,7,8 -TCDD (Dioxin)                                                                          X
Tetrachloroethylene                                              X                              X
Toluene                                                          X                              X
Toxaphene                                                                                       X
2,4,5 -TP                                                                                       X
1,2,4 -Trichlorobenzene                                          X                              X
1,1,1 -Trichloroethane                                           X                              X
1,1,2 -Trichloroethane                                           X                              X
Trichloroethylene                                                X                              X
Vinyl chloride                                                   X
Xylenes (total)                                                  X                              X
TTHM, HAA5, Bromate, Chlorite4
1   Packed Tower Aeration
2   Granular Activated Carbon
3   Oxidation (Chlorination or Ozonation) and Advanced Oxidation Process (AOP)
4   For surface water systems or ground water systems influenced by surface water, GAC10, as defined in section 5-1.1 of this Subpart, is the
    BAT for compliance with the TTHM and HAA5 MCL as a Running Annual Average (RAA). The other BAT for RAA compliance is


                                                                     22
    enhanced coagulation for TTHM and HAA5 precursor removal, as described in section 5-1.60 of this Subpart. For compliance with the
    MCLs for TTHM and HAA5 as LRAAs, the following are the BATs: enhanced coagulation or enhanced softening, plus GAC10; GAC20,
    as defined in section 5-1.1 of this Subpart;
    or nanofiltration with a molecular weight cutoff less than or equal to 100 Daltons. Refer to section 5-1.65 of this Subpart for BATs for
    TTHM, HAA5, Bromate, and Chlorite.




Section 5-1.100 is renumbered to section 5-1.110 and new sections 5-1.100 through 5-1.102 are

added, to read as follows:

§ 5-1.100 Applicability. The provisions of this section and sections 5-1.101 and 5-1.102 of this

Subpart shall become effective on April 1, 2023 and apply to any public water system that serves

at least five service connections used by year-round residents or that regularly serves at least

twenty-five year-round residents; or a public water system that regularly serves at least twenty-

five of the same people, four hours or more per day, for four or more days per week, for twenty-

six or more weeks per year.



§ 5-1.101 Monitoring requirements for emerging contaminants.

(a) The minimum monitoring requirements for emerging contaminants are listed in section 5-

1.52 table 9E of this Subpart. Samples collected in accordance with 40 CFR sections 141.40-

141.42 may be used to satisfy the requirements of this subdivision, notwithstanding the

requirements of subdivision (c) of this section.

(b) Unless the Department notifies the supplier of water in writing that samples shall be collected

at an alternate location, all samples shall be collected in accordance with section 5-1.52 table 9E

of this Subpart.

(c) Every test conducted in accordance with section 5-1.52 table 9E of this Subpart shall be

conducted by an environmental laboratory approved pursuant to Subpart 55-2 of this Title.




                                                                    23
Laboratories shall submit such results electronically to the Department, in accordance with

subdivision 5-1.74(c) of this Subpart.

(d) The Department may collect and analyze water samples from any public water system for

emerging contaminants at any time, either by its own personnel or by contract with others.



§ 5-1.102 Notification Levels

(a) The notification levels are located in 5-1.52 table 3B of this Subpart. Whenever one or more

emerging contaminants is confirmed to be present in drinking water at concentrations at or above

a notification level established pursuant to this Subpart, the supplier of water shall take the

following actions:

(1) The water supplier shall notify the State electronically within twenty-four hours in a manner

acceptable to the Department.

(2) the water supplier shall issue public notification in accordance with subdivision 5-1.78(f) of

this Subpart.

(3) The State may directly notify such owners of real property if it is determined that the public’s

interest would be best served by such notification, or if the State determines that the covered

public water system is not acting or cannot act in a timely manner.

(b) Notwithstanding anything contrary to this Subpart, the Commissioner may, by declaration,

add any physical, chemical, microbiological or radiological substance to the list of emerging

contaminants in section 5-1.52 Table 3B of this Subpart, establish a notification level, and

require monitoring for such substance, if the Commissioner determines that: (i) such substance

poses or has the potential to pose a significant hazard to human health when present in drinking

water; (ii) such substance was recently detected in a public water system and has the potential to



                                                 24
be present in other public water systems; and (iii) it appears to be prejudicial to the interests of

the people to delay action by preparing and filing regulations. The Commissioner shall, however,

promulgate regulations adding such new emerging contaminant or establishing such notification

level within one year of such declaration. Such declaration shall clearly state where and the date

by which such monitoring must occur. After the Commissioner promulgates regulations adding

such emerging contaminant, such regulations shall supersede the declaration issued pursuant to

this subdivision.

(c) the Commissioner may require that the covered public water system take such actions as may

be appropriate to reduce exposure to emerging contaminants. If the Commissioner determines

that the concentration of the emerging contaminant constitutes an actual or potential threat to

public health in accordance with subdivision 5-1.1(cc) of this Subpart, based on the best

available scientific information, the Commissioner shall consult with the Commissioner of the

Department of Environmental Conservation regarding any further action that may be appropriate,

including but not limited to actions pursuant to title twelve of article twenty-seven of the

Environmental Conservation Law.



The title of subdivision (B) of section (II) of Appendix 5-C is amended to read as follows: B.

Water Sample Compositing Requirements for Pesticides, Dioxin, PCBs, [PFOA, PFOS,] Per-

and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances and 1,4-Dioxane.




                                                  25
                  SUMMARY OF REGULATORY IMPACT STATEMENT

Statutory Authority:

       Section 201(1)(l) of the PHL establishes the powers and duties of the New York State

Department of Health (Department), which include the regulation of the sanitary aspects of

public water systems (PWS). Section 225 of the PHL sets forth the powers and duties of the

Public Health and Health Planning Council (PHHPC), which include the authority to establish,

amend and repeal sanitary regulations to be known as the State Sanitary Code (SSC), subject to

the approval of the Commissioner of Health. Section 1112 establishes the authority to require

monitoring for emerging contaminants and establish notification levels.



Legislative Objective:

       The legislative objective of section 1112 of the PHL is to ensure that the Department

promulgates regulations for emerging contaminants and establishes notification levels for those

contaminants. This amendment will update the SSC per the recommendations of the Drinking

Water Quality Council, by establishing MCLs for four (4) additional perfluoroalkyl substances,

modifying reporting requirements, requiring monitoring for emerging contaminants and

establishing notification levels.



Needs and Benefits:

       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements (ECMR): Public Health Law Section

1112 (PHL 1112) requires the Department to adopt ECMR. The effective date of the monitoring

requirements will be April 1, 2023.




                                               26
        Notification Levels (NL): PHL § 1112 requires that NL be established for twenty-three

PFAS designated as emerging contaminants. The first category is a sum of 6 compounds to

0.0000300 mg/L (30 ppt) with a 10 ppt notification level for hexafluoropropylene oxide-dimer

acid (HFPO-DA/GenX) and the second category is a sum of 13 compounds to 0.000100 mg/L

(100 ppt). Decisions on each PFAS chemical’s notification category were made based on an

evaluation of liver toxicity effect levels, human half-lives, established reference doses, and

chemical structure similarities. The 30 ppt notification levels applies to the sum of six (6) PFAS

compounds and the 100 ppt NL applies to the sum 13 PFAS compounds. Confirmed sample

results that are at or above either NL will prioritize evaluations of the public water system, allow

for exposure reduction recommendations based on those evaluations, and provide advanced

communication to the community served by the water system.

        Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCL): The Department proposes MCLs of 10 ppt each

for perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS), perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA),

perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), and perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA). A combined MCL of 30

ppt is proposed for the sum of PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA (PFAS6). The

Department estimates a 1.46 percent increase in MCL violations if MCLs for PFHxS, PFHpA,

PFNA, and PFDA are promulgated at 10 ppt each.



Costs

Compliance Costs

        ECMR: PHL § 1112 applies to both community water systems (CWS) and nontransient

noncommunity water systems (NTNC). The cost of analysis is estimated to be between $350




                                                 27
and $700 per sample. The cost to the average water system, based on 1.7 entry points per system,

is between $595 and $1,190.



       NL: The Department estimates a notification cost of $5, including labor, fees and

postage, per service connection that needs to be notified. Four (4) water systems are expected to

distribute public notification for the first category and 26 water systems are expected to exceed

the NL for the second category.

       MCL: There are approximately 3,000 PWS that will be required to routinely monitor for

PFNA, PFDA, PFHxS and PFHpA. Initial monitoring for PFAS6 compounds must be completed

by December 31, 2023. Each PWS will be required to comply with the MCL by January 1, 2025.

This proposal modifies the analytical requirements by mandating reporting all compounds in

EPA 537.1 or EPA 533. The Department estimates that the cost of the full analytical method will

be between $350 and $700 per sample. The number of samples required is based on number of

sources, and compliance monitoring results. Less sampling is required when no contaminants are

detected.



Costs to Private Regulated Parties

       ECMR: The ECMR apply to CWS) and NTNC water systems, including private water

systems. It is estimated that a significant percentage of the approximately 2,200 PWS that serve

less than 1,000 people are privately owned. The total estimated cost to these PWS is $1,309,000

and $2,618,000. There are approximately 550 PWS that serve fewer than 25 people or five

service connections that will be required to comply. The total cost to these water systems is

anticipated to be $327,250-$654,500. These exact costs are dependent on variables such as the



                                                28
number of sources and/or entry points, the source water type the level of contaminants detected

and are therefore difficult to estimate. The costs are dependent the number of sources and/or

entry points, the source water type and the level of contaminants detected.



       NL: The cost of notices is estimated to be $5 per connection.

       MCL: Monitoring and treatment costs for each privately-owned PWS is dependent upon

the system size, the number of affected entry points/sources and the concentration of each

contaminant. The cost for a single sample for emerging contaminants is between $350-$700 per

sample using either USEPAUSEPA method 533 or 537.1, including field reagent blank costs.

Compliance monitoring for PFNA, PFHxS, PFDA and PFHpS can be conducted using either

USEPA method 533 or 537.1.

       Privately-owned water systems with MCL violations will be required to take actions to

come into compliance, which may require the installation of treatment. The U.S. Environmental

Protection Agency (USEPA) has developed a cost estimating tool for different PFAS treatment

options. Total annualized costs using this costing tool include capital costs for the purchase of

treatment system components (amortized over an approximately 20-year period) and annual

operation and maintenance costs. The cost estimating tool approximates that total annualized

costs for systems serving 501 to 3,330 persons could range from $87,700 to $134,000, systems

serving 3,301 to 10,000 persons could range from $335,000 to $489,500, systems serving 10,001

to 50,000 persons could range from $1,016,000 to $1,476,900, systems serving 50,001 to

100,000 persons could range from $2,281,900 to $3,316,800, and systems serving more than

100,000 persons could range from $7,255,600 to $10,640,000 based on 2020 dollars and the use

of granular activated carbon (GAC) treatment. The approximate total annualized cost for GAC



                                                 29
treatment for these very small systems could range from $19,800 to $33,300, and the

approximate costs for providing point-of-use units could range from $1,700 to $33,800



Cost to State Government:

       ECMR: Approximately 250 state operated facilities will be required to comply. The cost

of monitoring is anticipated to be between $350 and $750 per entry point. The cost per average

water system, based on 1.7 entry points per system is between $595 and $1,190 per water system

for a total financial impact to the State of between $148,750 and $295,500.

       The Department will incur costs to implement the ECMR. The cost to the Department

will range from $682,000 for salary, fringe and information technology for regulatory

implementation and enforcement only. The estimated cost is $9,000,000 for a program that

includes monitoring assistance for small and disadvantaged communities that serve fewer than

3,300 people.

       NL: The Department estimates that the cost per notice will be $5 per connection.

       MCL: State agencies that operate a PWS will be required to comply with the proposed

amendments. There are approximately 250 State-owned or operated facilities.

       Costs will include monitoring and treatment in the event of a MCL exceedance. These

potential costs will be the same as the costs to private regulated parties.

       The proposed regulation will also create administrative costs to the Department as well as

costs to the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC).



Cost to Local Government:

       The regulations will apply to local governments which own or operate a PWS.



                                                 30
       ECMR: There are approximately 1,500 PWS that are owned or operated by local

governments. The cost per average water system, based on 1.7 entry points per system is

between $595 and $1,190 per water system. As a result, the total cost to local government for

monitoring is expected to be between $892,500 and $1,785,000. Water systems with more entry

points will have a proportionally higher cost.

       NL: There are approximately 1,500 PWS that are owned or operated by local

governments. It is expected that 13 notifications will be required. The Department estimates a

cost of $5 per connection.

       MCL: The regulations will apply to local governments. There are approximately 1,500

PWS that are owned or operated by local governments. Costs will include monitoring for

PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA, PFDA and/or PFAS6, and treatment in the event of a MCL violation.

       Local health departments that regulate drinking water will also incur administrative costs

related to local implementation and oversight.



Local Government Mandates:

       Local governments will be required to comply with this regulation as noted above.



Paperwork:

       ECMR and NL: The ECMR and NL are new monitoring and regulatory programs with

associated paperwork, tracking and enforcement.




                                                 31
       MCL: The additional monitoring, reporting, recordkeeping and paperwork needed for

PFAS6 is expected to be minimal. The reporting and recordkeeping requirements will increase if

MCLs are exceeded and/or treatment is required.



Duplication:

       The ECMR is duplicative with the federal Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule

(UCMR) for each PWS that serves 3,300 or more people. For NL and MCL, there will be no

duplication.



Alternatives:

       Three alternatives to MCLs were considered: 1. maintain the existing MCL of 0.05 mg/L

that applies to all organic chemicals when no chemical specific MCL exists for PFNA, PFHxS,

PFHpA and PFDA; 2. wait for the US USEPA to issue a federal MCL; or 3. promulgate an MCL

for PFNA, PFHxS, PFHpA and PFDA at 10 ppt each. Based on deliberations of the DWQC and

the additional toxicological analysis conducted by the Department it was determined that the

current MCL of 0.05 mg/L is not protective of public health for these four specific chemicals.

Waiting for the USEPA to set a new MCL was impractical due to the prevalence and concerns

surrounding these compounds combined with the timeframes required under the Safe Drinking

Water Act.

       The 10 ppt standard, while health protective, will allow for a total concentration of

upwards of 60 ppt, which is not sufficiently health protective. Therefore, the Department

determined that adoption of the MCLs as recommended by DWQC for PFNA, PFHxS, PFHpA




                                                32
and PFDA, as well as establishing PFAS6 MCL is in the best interest of protecting the public

health.



Federal Standards:

          The ECMR proposal is similar to UCMR5 but expands the scope by extending

applicability to PWS that serve fewer than 3,300 persons. There are no federal standards for NL

and MCL.



Compliance Schedule:

          Each PWS will begin monitoring for emerging contaminants beginning April 1, 2023. A

PWS may monitor in accordance with the schedule established by USEPA for UCMR5. The

effective date for NLs is April 1, 2023. Public notification is required for a PWS that detects or

has detected emerging contaminants at or above the NL.       For MCL, all water systems must

begin monitoring for PFAS6 and report all compounds in the analytical method beginning April

1, 2023. If the MCL is exceeded or compounds are detected at or above a NL, public notification

is required. Compliance with the MCL is required by January 1, 2025.



Contact Person:

Katherine Ceroalo
New York State Department of Health
Bureau of Program Counsel, Regulatory Affairs Unit
Corning Tower Building, Rm. 2438
Empire State Plaza
Albany, New York 12237
(518) 473-7488
(518) 473-2019 (FAX)
REGSQNA@health.ny.gov



                                                33
                          REGULATORY IMPACT STATEMENT

Statutory Authority:

       The statutory authority for the proposed regulations is set forth in Public Health Law

(PHL) Sections 201, 225 and 1112. Section 201(1)(l) of the PHL establishes the powers and

duties of the New York State Department of Health (Department), which include the supervision

and regulation of the sanitary aspects of public water system (PWS). Section 225 of the PHL sets

forth the powers and duties of the Public Health and Health Planning Council (PHHPC), which

include the authority to establish, amend and repeal sanitary regulations to be known as the State

Sanitary Code (SSC), subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Health. Further, section

225(5)(a) of the PHL allows the SSC to deal with any matter affecting the security of life or

health, or the preservation or improvement of public health, in New York State and allows the

Department to establish Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCL). Section 1112 establishes the

authority to require monitoring for emerging contaminants and establish notification levels.



Legislative Objective:

       The legislative objective of sections 201 and 225 of the PHL is to ensure that the

Department and PHHPC, in conjunction with the Commissioner of Health, protect public health

by adopting drinking water sanitary standards. The legislative objective of section 1112 of the

PHL is to ensure that the Department promulgates regulations defining the monitoring

requirements for emerging contaminants and establishes notification levels for those

contaminants. In accordance with those objectives, this regulation amends the SSC by revising

Part 5 to enhance current protections governing PWS. Furthermore, this amendment will update

the SSC in accordance with the recommendations of the Drinking Water Quality Council



                                                34
(DWQC), by establishing MCLs for four (4) additional perfluoroalkyl substances and modifying

reporting requirements, requiring monitoring for the emerging contaminants listed in the PHL

and establishing notification levels.



Needs and Benefits:

       PHL § 1112 specifically lists 23 per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) as emerging

contaminants, for which the Department must adopt monitoring and public notification

requirements for every covered public water system. PFAS are a group of synthetic organic

chemicals that have been manufactured or used throughout the United States in a wide range of

consumer products and industrial applications. They have been used in non-stick cookware,

water-repellent clothing, stain-resistant fabrics and carpets, cosmetics, firefighting foams,

electroplating, and products that resist grease, water, and oil.

         The DWQC, established pursuant to PHL § 1113, is charged with making

recommendations to the Department on which compounds should be listed as emerging

contaminants and their corresponding notification levels. After discussion and deliberation

spanning several meetings, the DWQC voted to accept the Department’s recommendation to

proceed with regulations adopting the first list of emerging contaminants with two notification

level categories; adopt MCLs of 10 ppt for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA; and have the

Department evaluate the feasibility of an MCL that is the sum of six (6) PFAS compounds. PHL

§ 1112 directs that, through regulation, any substance can be removed from the list of emerging

contaminants upon adopting a maximum contaminant level for such substance. Available

toxicology information and occurrence data support the Department’s recommendation to




                                                  35
exclude PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA from the first emerging contaminants list in favor of

substance specific MCLs.



Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements:

       In 2021, PHL § 1112 was amended to include the first list of emerging contaminants and

required that the commissioner publish regulations to adopt the following compounds as

emerging contaminants within 180 days: perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA);

perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS); perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA);

perfluorobutanesulfonic acid (PFBS); hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer acid (HFPO-DA);

Perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA); Perfluorododecanoic acid (PFDoA); Perfluorohexanoic acid

(PFHxA); Perfluoroundecanoic acid (PFUnA); 11-chloroeicosafluoro-3-oxaundecane-1-sulfonic

acid (11Cl-PF3OUdS); 9-chlorohexadecafluoro-3-oxanonane-1-sulfonic acid (9Cl-PF3ONS);

4,8-dioxa-3H-perfluorononanoic acid (ADONA); Nonafluoro-3,6-dioxaheptanoic acid

(NFDHA); Perfluorobutanoic acid (PFBA); 1H, 1H, 2H, 2HPerfluorodecane sulfonic acid

(8:2FTS); Perfluoro(2-ethoxyethane)sulfonic acid (PFEESA); Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid

(PFHpS); 1H,1H, 2H, 2H-Perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (4:2FTS); Perfluoro-3-

methoxypropanoic acid (PFMPA); Perfluoro-4-methoxybutanoic acid (PFMBA); 1H,1H, 2H,

2H-Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (6:2FTS); and Perfluoropentanoic acid (PFPeA);

Perfluoropentanesulfonic acid (PFPeS).

       The Department is amending 10 NYCRR Part 5 to establish monitoring requirements for

the emerging contaminants listed above, except for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA. As

described above, an MCL will be established for these compounds, and monitoring will be




                                              36
conducted in accordance with the MCL. Per PHL § 1112, establishing an MCL will remove

these compounds from the emerging contaminant list.



Notification Levels for Emerging Contaminants:

       In 2021, PHL § 1112 was amended to require the Commissioner to promulgate

regulations establishing notification levels for any listed emerging contaminant. The PHL

requires notification levels be equal to or lower than any federal lifetime health advisory level

established pursuant to the federal Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. § 300g-1), if available.

For the current compounds listed as emerging contaminants, there are no federal lifetime health

advisory levels.

       Based on a review of available scientific literature, the Department presented two

categories of notification levels to the DWQC on May 2, 2022. The first category is the

prioritized PFAS notification level category and is a sum of six chemicals to 0.0000300 mg/L

(30 ppt) with a 10 ppt notification level for hexafluoropropylene oxide-dimer acid (HFPO-

DA/GenX) and the second category is a sum of 13 compounds to 0.000100 mg/L (100 ppt). The

remaining PFAS notification level category is the sum of 13 chemicals to 0.000100 mg/L (100

ppt). These chemicals are listed in Table 1.




                                                 37
Table 1 – Summary of Notification Level Categories
     Prioritized PFAS Notification Level Category       Remaining PFAS Notification Level Category
               Notification Level = 30 ppt                         Notification Level = 100 ppt
                  Sum of 6 Chemicals                                  Sum of 13 Chemicals
                         PFHpS                                   PFBA                      4:2FTS
                         PFUnA                                   PFBS                      6:2FTS
                         PFDoA                                   PFPeA                     8:2FTS
                         GenX*                                   PFPeS                    NFDHA
                      9Cl-PF3ONS                                PFHxA                     PFEESA
                     11Cl-PF3OUdS                               ADONA                     PFMPA
                                                                                          PFMBA
    * Notification is required if HFPO-DA (GenX) is equal to or exceeds 0.000010 mg/L or 10 ppt.


       New York State currently has MCLs for perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and

perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) at 0.0000100 milligrams-per-liter (mg/L) or 10 parts-per-trillion

(ppt) each. Monitoring for PFOA and PFOS has been conducted since 2020-2021 for the 3,000

PWS required to monitor. When the MCL for PFOA or PFOS is exceeded, the existing

regulation requires the water system to collect between one and three follow up samples to

confirm the levels of the compound in drinking water. The confirmation samples are required to

include all analytes reported in the approved analytical method. Similarly, when either PFOS or

PFOA are detected above the method detection limit, regulations require that subsequent

quarterly monitoring includes all analytes contained in the approved analytical method. As such,

the Department has a robust dataset on the occurrence of additional PFAS compounds, based on

analytical data reported by approximately 1,000 PWS.

       Based on an evaluation of the existing monitoring data, it was determined that the six

compounds in the prioritized PFAS notification level category occurred at levels between 2.1 and

10 ppt in 13 PWS; 10.1-20 ppt in four (4) PWS; 20.1-30 ppt in one (1) PWS; and 50.1-75 ppt in

one (1) PWS. The thirteen compounds in the remaining PFAS notification level category

occurred at levels between 2.1-10 ppt in 286 PWS; 10.1-20 in 89 PWS; 20.1-30 ppt in 32 PWS;

30.1-40 ppt in 17 PWS; 40.1-50 ppt in 7 PWS; 50.1-75 ppt in 12 PWS; 75.1-100 ppt in 5 PWS;

and >100 ppt in 13 PWS. As such 0.12% of PWS or four (4) PWS would be required to provide
                                                    38
public notification due to the presence of compounds at or above the notification level in the first

category and 2.45% of PWS or 87 PWS would be required to provide public notification due to

presence of compounds at or above the notification level in in the second category.

        During a public meeting of the DWQC on May 2, 2022, the Department presented

detailed technical information on the toxicology of emerging contaminants, as well as on the

general methods used to derive health-based drinking water concentrations that are protective

against noncancer health effects. These presentations included key citations to the extensive,

publicly available scientific literature upon which the Department relied.

        Notification levels rather than chemical specific MCLs are implemented for these 19

emerging PFAS because the available toxicity information for most of these chemicals does not

inform derivation of chemical-specific health-based drinking water values, which is an important

step in the MCL derivation process. There are also limited state-specific occurrence data for

most of the 19 PFAS. Implementing notification levels for these emerging PFAS will provide

occurrence data to inform future prioritization of chemical-specific drinking water standards and

will identify drinking water systems for possible exposure reduction measures. Notification

levels will also provide advance communication to the community served by the water system if

such a level is exceeded.

        The Department presented an approach to the DWQC that separates the 19 emerging

PFAS into two notification level categories. The notification level categories are based on

differences in the available toxicity1 and human half-life information for the 19 emerging PFAS.

One category is designated for emerging PFAS having toxicity and half-life information

indicating the need for prioritization and notification at a lower water concentration. The second


1
  Studies evaluating the carcinogenicity of most of the 19 emerging PFAS are not available. Therefore, noncancer
toxicity information was used for this notification level approach.

                                                        39
category is designated for the remaining emerging PFAS, for which the currently available

toxicity and half-life information is either insufficient or does not indicate a need for including in

the group of prioritized PFAS chemicals.

       The Department identified chemicals for the prioritized lower notification level category

based on four criteria:

   •   A low liver toxicity effect level observed in laboratory animal studies

   •   A long-estimated half-life in humans

   •   A low reference dose established by one or more authoritative bodies

   •   A chemical structure similar to chemicals with low toxicity effect levels, long human

       half-lives, or low reference doses.

If the available information for the emerging PFAS satisfied any of these criteria, the Department

included the chemical in the prioritized notification level category. The Department used the

liver toxicity effect level because it provides a consistent means of comparison across several of

the 19 emerging PFAS, and is a well-established, sensitive endpoint for this group of chemicals.

Liver toxicity was consistently observed in two comparative rat toxicity studies of seven short-

and long-chain PFAS conducted by the National Toxicology Program (NTP 2018a,b). The NTP

reported that liver toxicity was induced at lower dose levels of long-chain PFAS (PFHxS, PFOA,

PFOS, PFNA, and PFDA) compared to the short-chain PFAS (PFBS and PFHxA). Chemicals

with lower effect levels are considered more toxic than those with higher effect levels, and

therefore PFAS with relatively low effect levels for liver toxicity were prioritized for the lower

notification level category.

       The human half-life is a measure of how long a chemical remains in the body. Long-

chain PFAS have been shown to have substantially longer half-lives in humans when compared


                                                 40
to short-chain PFAS (ATSDR 2021). Longer human half-lives among PFAS are generally

associated with greater toxicity, and therefore provide a basis for prioritizing emerging PFAS for

the lower notification level category.

        The reference dose is an estimate of the daily oral lifetime human exposure to a chemical

that is not expected to result in adverse noncancer health effects. Reference doses are set at

exposure levels much lower than those known or estimated to cause health effects. A low

reference dose indicates a higher degree of toxicity for a chemical than one with a higher

reference dose. Reference doses for several of the emerging PFAS have been derived by

authoritative bodies, and therefore the Department prioritized emerging PFAS that have a

relatively low reference dose (indicating a greater degree of toxicity) for the lower notification

level category.

        If data on effect levels and human half-life were not available or insufficient, and if a

reference dose was not available, similarities in chemical structure to other PFAS having more

information on these parameters were also used as a basis for selecting the notification level

category for the chemical.

        Of the 19 emerging PFAS that were considered for the notification level approach, six

met the criteria to be prioritized for the lower notification level. The available toxicity, half-life,

and reference dose information for each of these six chemicals is provided in Table 2.

                Table 2. Toxicity, Human Half-life, and Reference Dose Information
           for Six Emerging PFAS Prioritized for the Lower Notification Level Category
                                                                                               Reference
                        Liver Toxicity Effect Level
  Emerging PFAS                                            Estimated Human Half-Life             Dose
                               (mg/kg/day)
                                                                                              (ng/kg/day)
                                                                  1.46 – 4.7 years
      PFHpS a                         -                                                            -
                                                           (Xu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2019)
                                                                   4.5 – 12 years
                                    0.3
       PFUnA                                               (Zhang et al. 2013, as cited in         -
                           (Takahashi et al. 2014)
                                                                   ATSDR 2021)
                                    0.5
      PFDoA b                                                             -                        -
                             (Kato et al. 2015)


                                                      41
                                           0.5                                   81 hours                              3
        Gen-X c                (Dupont 2010, as cited in US           (US USEPA 2021a using data from             (US USEPA
                                     USEPA 2021a)                              Clark 2021)                          2021a)
                                          0.04                                  15.3 years
     9Cl-PF3ONS                                                                                                          -
                                   (Zhang et al. 2018)                       (Shi et al. 2016)
                                                                               > 15.3 years
    11Cl-PF3OUdS d                             -                                                                         -
                                                                             (Shi et al. 2016)
a
  Toxicity studies are limited for PFHpS and a liver toxicity effect level is not available. The estimated PFHpS human half-life is
long (measured in multiple years), and PFHpS is structurally similar to fully fluorinated, straight-chain perfluoro sulfonic acids
that have low effect levels and long human half-lives (e.g., PFHxS, PFOS). PFHpS differs from PFHxS and PFOS by only one
carbon atom in the fully fluorinated carbon chain. Therefore, PFHpS is included in the prioritized, lower notification level
category.
b
  Human half-life estimates for PFDoA are not available. The liver toxicity effect level is similar to PFUnA, which is a
structurally similar long-chain PFAS with a long estimated human half-life. Therefore, PFDoA is included in the prioritized,
lower notification level category.
c
  Gen-X has a short estimated human half-life, but a low effect level for liver toxicity. The Gen-X reference dose is consistent
with established reference doses for PFAS having a greater degree of relative toxicity (reference doses for PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS,
PFHpA, PFNA, and PFDA are all lower than 5 ng/kg/day). Therefore, Gen-X is included in the prioritized, lower notification
level category.
d
  Toxicity studies are limited for 11Cl-PF3OUdS, and a liver toxicity effect level is not available. One study suggests that the
11Cl-PF3OUdS human half-life is expected to be longer than the structurally similar 9Cl-PF3ONS. 11Cl-PF3OUdS differs from
9Cl-PF3ONS only in that it has two additional fully fluorinated carbons in the carbon chain. Therefore, 11Cl-PF3OUdS is
included in the prioritized, lower notification level category.

          The remaining 13 emerging PFAS are placed in a second notification level category. For

these chemicals, the available information suggests higher effect levels, (higher doses of the

chemical are required to cause an adverse health effect) and shorter human half-lives (the

chemical is removed from the body faster) than are reported for chemicals in the prioritized

notification level category. Additionally, the established reference doses for three of these 13

PFAS (PFBA, PFBS, PFHxA) are much higher than reference doses of the long-chain identified

for the chemical-specific MCL approach (reference doses were all below 5 ng/kg/day for PFHxS,

PFHpA, PFNA, and PFDA), as well the reference doses for the currently regulated PFAS (PFOA

and PFOS). These considerations support grouping the 13-remaining emerging PFAS in a second

and higher notification level category. Toxicity, half-life, and reference dose information for the

remaining 13 emerging PFAS is summarized in Table 3.

                   Table 3. Toxicity, Human Half-life, and Reference Dose Information
            for the Remaining 13 Emerging PFAS for the Second Notification Level Category
                                            Liver Toxicity Effect           Estimated Human                Reference Dose
          Emerging PFAS
                                             Level (mg/kg/day)                   Half-Life                  (ng/kg/day)
                                                                                   3 days
                                                    30                                                         1000
                PFBA                                                      (Change et al. 2008, as
                                           (Butenhoff et al. 2012)                                       (US USEPA 2021b)
                                                                          cited in ATSDR 2021)

                                                                42
                                                                                    44 days
                                                    62.6                      (Xu et al. 2020, as               300
                PFBS
                                                 (NTP 2019a)                 cited in US USEPA            (US USEPA 2021c)
                                                                                    2021c)
                                                                                   < 14 days
                PFPeA                                   -                                                            -
                                                                               (Xu et al. 2020)
                                                                                223 – 365 days
               PFPeS a                                  -                   (Xu et al. 2020; Li et                   -
                                                                                   al. 2019)
                                                                                   11.5 days
                                                    125                    (Nilsson et al. 2013, as             500
               PFHxA
                                                 (NTP 2019b)                 cited in US USEPA            (US USEPA 2022)
                                                                                     2022)
                                                     30                          16 – 31 days
               ADONA                                                                                                 -
                                             (Gordon et al 2011)                 (EFSA 2011)
              4:2 FTS b                               -                                 -                            -
                                                      5
              6:2 FTS    b
                                                                                       -                             -
                                              (Sheng et al 2017)
              8:2 FTS b                               -                                -                             -
              NFDHA c                                 -                                -                             -
              PFEESA c                                -                                -                             -
              PFMPA c                                 -                                -                             -
              PFMBA c                                 -                                -                             -
a
  The human half-life data for PFPeS suggest a half-life approaching one year, rather than multiple years as for the emerging
PFAS prioritized for a lower notification level (Table 1). Therefore, PFPeS has been identified for the second, higher notification
level category.
b
  Of the three fluorotelomer sulfonates identified as emerging PFAS (4:2, 6:2, and 8:2 FTS), only 6:2 FTS has comparative
toxicity information. The liver toxicity effect level is higher than effect levels observed for the prioritized notification level
category (Table 1). Human half-life data were not available for 6:2 FTS, however, the European Chemical Agency (ECHA 2020)
noted that urinary excretion times in rats suggest a half-life of 20-24 hours. Rat half-life data suggest that short-chain PFAS have
half-lives in the range of 2 – 13 hours, whereas long-chain PFAS have rat half-lives on the order of weeks to months (ATSDR
2021). A comparison of the rat half-life information suggests that the half-life of 6:2 FTS is comparable with that of other short-
chain PFAS that have been identified for the second, higher notification level category. The 4:2 and 8:2 FTS are included in this
second notification level category based on their structural similarity with the 6:2 FTS.
c
  Comparative information was not identified for NFDHA, PFEESA, PFMPA, and PFMBA. These PFAS contain shorter
fluorinated carbon chains (≤ 4 carbons) than chemicals that have been prioritized for the lower notification level category (Table
1). Therefore, these PFAS have been included in the second, higher notification level category.



          The prioritized notification level category is set at a drinking water concentration of 30

ppt, which applies to the combined concentration of the emerging PFAS identified for this

category with a 10 ppt notification level for hexafluoropropylene oxide-dimer acid (HFPO-

DA/GenX). Six PFAS were designated for the 30 ppt category based on chemical-specific

information that suggest these chemicals have a higher degree of toxicity when compared to

other chemicals in the group of 19 emerging PFAS. These six prioritized chemicals have low

liver toxicity effect levels, long human half-lives, or low reference doses, or they are structurally


                                                                43
similar to other emerging PFAS with known toxicity. These parameters suggest that notification

is needed at a lower water concentration.

       The notification level of 30 ppt was also evaluated in the context of available drinking

water standards and guidelines established by other states for chemicals in this prioritized

notification level category, which are generally set a health-protective levels that are much lower

than levels known to cause health effects. Of the six emerging PFAS in this group, Gen-X is the

only chemical with established drinking water standards and guidelines. The range of these

values is 21-370 ppt (Table 4). The notification level of 30 ppt is at the low end of this range.


          Table 4. State Drinking Water Standards and Guidelines Established for Gen-X
                                                                        Drinking Water Standard or
                                                             Year
                   State Agency                                                  Guideline
                                                          Established
                                                                                  (ppt)
       Ohio Environmental Protection Agency                  2022                   21
  Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes,           2020                  370
                    and Energy
   North Carolina Department of Health and Human             2017                  140
                      Services



       Finally, the notification level of 30 ppt was evaluated in the context of analytical

detection limits. The total concentration of six chemicals would be used to determine if the

notification level is exceeded, and analytical methods used to measure these chemicals in

drinking water have limitations and variations in the concentration of the chemical that can be

reliably reported. The notification level value cannot be set below the level that is reliably

reported by the analytical method. The analytical method must be able to reliably report each of

the six prioritized emerging PFAS at 5 ppt. Based on analytical methods developed by US

USEPA (US USEPA 2019b, 2020b), a notification level of 30 ppt for the total concentration of

six PFAS should retain confidence in the analytical results.




                                                     44
       The remaining 13 PFAS have been placed in a second category with a notification level

of 100 ppt for the total concentration of the PFAS in the group. The notification level of 100 ppt

was selected by evaluating drinking water standards and guidelines established by other states

for chemicals in this category, with consideration of analytical detection limits. Drinking water

standards and guidelines have been established for PFBA, PFBS, and PFHxA, and the values

range from 100 to 560,000 ppt (Table 5). The notification level of 100 ppt is the low end of this

range. Further, a level of 100 ppt is indicative of a significant source of contamination at which

notification is needed for the community served by the water system.

                     Table 5. State Drinking Water Standards and Guidelines
                            Established for PFBA, PFBS, and PFHxA
                                                                       Drinking Water Standard or
                                                          Year(s)               Guideline
                    State Agency
                                                        Established              (ppt)
                                                                      PFBA       PFBS       PFHxA
            Minnesota Department of Health              2018-2022      7000        100        200
                 California Water Boards                  2022                     500
       Illinois Environmental Protection Agency           2021                    2,100     560,000
 Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and
                                                           2020                   420       400,000
                          Energy
        Ohio Environmental Protection Agency               2019                  2,100



       The notification level of 100 ppt was evaluated in the context of analytical detection

limits. As was discussed above for the prioritized notification level, the total concentration of

chemicals in the category would be used to determine if the notification level is exceeded. For

the 100 ppt notification category, the analytical method must be able to reliably report each of

the 13 emerging PFAS at 8 ppt. Based on analytical methods developed by US USEPA (US

USEPA 2019b, 2020b), a notification level of 100 ppt for the total concentration of these 13

PFAS should retain confidence in the analytical results.

       The Department is proposing to amend 10 NYCRR Part 5 to establish a notification level

of 30 ppt for the sum of PFHps, PFUnA, PFDoA, GenX, 9Cl PF3ONS and 11ClPF3OUdS; and a


                                                   45
notification level of 100 ppt for the sum of PFBA, PFBS, PFPeA, PFPeS, PFHxA, ADONA

4:2FTS, 6:2FTS, 8:2FTS, NFDHA, PFEESA, PFMPA and PFMBA. The notification levels will

apply to all public water systems regulated by the Department and will reduce lifetime exposure

through drinking water for the general population.



Maximum Contaminant Levels:

       New York State currently has MCLs for perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and

perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) at 0.0000100 milligrams-per-liter (mg/L) or 10 parts-per-trillion

(ppt) each. Monitoring for PFOA and PFOS has been conducted since 2020-2021 for the 3,000

PWS required to monitor. When the MCL for PFOA or PFOS is exceeded, the existing

regulation requires the water system to collect between one and three follow up samples to

confirm the levels of the compound in drinking water. The confirmation samples are required to

include all analytes reported in the approved analytical method. Similarly, when either PFOS or

PFOA are detected above the method detection limit, regulations require that subsequent

quarterly monitoring includes all analytes contained in the approved analytical method. As such,

the Department has a robust dataset on the occurrence of additional PFAS compounds, based on

analytical data reported by approximately 1,000 PWS.

       Based on the evaluation of existing monitoring data, it was determined that PFDA has

been detected in two (2) PWS greater than 10 ppt. Twelve (12) PWS have reported PFDA at

concentrations less than 10 ppt. PFHpA has been detected in 39 PWS greater than 10 ppt. A total

of 206 PWS have reported PFHpA at concentrations less than 10 ppt. PFHxS has been detected

in 29 PWS greater than 10 ppt. A total of 146 PWS have reported PFHxS at concentrations less

than 10 ppt. PFNA has been detected in 30 PWS greater than 10 ppt. A total of 56 PWS have



                                               46
reported PFNA at concentrations less than 10 ppt. A total of 139 PWS have total concentrations

of PFAS6 greater than 30 ppt. As such, approximately 7% of water systems would be required to

undertake corrective action as a result of promulgating individual MCL of 10 ppt. Some systems

were found to exceed multiple compounds listed above. Many PWS in this category already

exceed the MCL for PFOA and/or PFOS or have an enforcement deferral for these compounds

and are working towards or have achieved corrective action that is expected to also address these

compounds. Based on this occurrence data, the Department estimates an overall 1.46 percent

increase in the number MCL violations for PFAS if MCLs for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA, and

PFDA are promulgated at 10 ppt each. Therefore, it is anticipated that 44 water systems will

exceed the proposed MCL for these compounds requiring corrective actions not already triggered

due to exceedances of other PFAS compounds.

          During public meetings of the DWQC on March 10, 2022, and May 2, 2022, the

Department presented detailed technical information on the toxicology of PFHxS, PFHpA,

PFNA, and PFDA, as well as on the general methods used to derive health-based drinking water

concentrations that are protective against noncancer health effects. These presentations included

key citations to the extensive, publicly available scientific literature upon which the Department

relied.

          The toxicity of PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA, and PFDA has been reviewed and

summarized by several authoritative state, national, and international bodies (US USEPA

2016a,b, 2021a,b,c, 2022; ATSDR 2021; EFSA 2011, 2018, 2020; NTP 2016, 2018a,b; NJ DEP

2015, 2019a,b, MA DEP 2019, CA OEHHA 2022). These reviews identify important studies on

the health effects associated with exposure to these chemicals, including studies on cancer and

non-cancer, developmental, and reproductive effects observed in humans and animals.



                                                47
       Human studies show associations between increased PFOA exposure and an increased

risk for several health effects. These include effects on the liver, kidney, immune system, thyroid

gland, cholesterol levels, pre-eclampsia (a complication of pregnancy that includes high blood

pressure), and kidney and testicular cancer (C8 Science Panel 2017; Darrow et al. 2013;

Steenland et al. 2012; Steenland et al. 2013; Winquist and Steenland 2014; Barry et al. 2013;

Costa 2009; Darrow et al. 2016; Shearer et al. 2021). Human studies also show associations

between increased PFOS exposure and an increased risk for several health effects, including

increases in total cholesterol in serum (i.e., the fluid portion of blood that contains components

not used in clotting), triglycerides, and uric acid, as well as effects on the immune system,

reproduction and development (Olsen et al. 2003; Steenland et al. 2009; Gleason et al. 2015;

Grandjean et al. 2012; Grandjean et al. 2017; Fei et al. 2012; Verner et al. 2015).

       Exposure to PFOA or PFOS has been shown to cause several types of adverse health

effects in numerous studies of laboratory animals. PFOA caused cancer of the liver, pancreas,

and testis in male rats exposed for their lifetimes (Butenhoff et al. 2012a; NTP 2020). Non-

cancer health effects caused by PFOA exposure in animals include liver toxicity, developmental

toxicity, and immune system toxicity (Macon et al. 2011; Loveless et al. 2006; Lau et al. 2006;

DeWitt et al. 2015). PFOS caused liver and thyroid cancer in rats exposed for their lifetimes

(Butenhoff et al. 2012b). PFOS also causes several non-cancer health effects in animals,

including adverse effects on the immune system, reduced offspring body weight, and effects on

the developing nervous system (Dong et al. 2009; Luebker et al. 2005; Butenhoff et al. 2009).

       Studies in humans show associations between exposures to PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and

PFDA and an increased risk for several health effects. These include effects on serum lipids,

cardiovascular function, liver enzymes, the immune system, the reproductive system, and thyroid



                                                 48
hormone levels (ATSDR 2021, CA OEHHA 2022, Cakmak et al. 2022, Guo et al. 2021, Kvalem

et al. 2020, Shen et al. 2022, Wang et al. 2021). Human studies have also identified associations

between exposures to PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA and an increased risk for breast cancer

(Velarde et al. 2022, Wielsøe et al. 2017, Feng et al. 2022), and exposures to PFHxS and PFDA

have been associated with an increased prostate cancer risk among those with hereditary risk

(Hardell et al. 2014).

       PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA cause several types of adverse health effects in studies

of laboratory animals exposed to these chemicals. Each of the chemicals causes liver and

reproductive toxicity in animals (ATSDR 2021, NTP 2018a,b, Han et al. 2020, Li et al. 2021).

PFHxS, PFNA, and PFDA also cause thyroid and developmental toxicity, and PFNA and PFDA

cause immune toxicity (ATSDR 2021, NTP 2018a,b). Animal studies that evaluate the

carcinogenicity of PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA are not available.

       The Department evaluated the toxicity of the six PFAS (PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, PFHpA,

PFNA, and PFDA). Based on similarities in chemical structure, common health endpoints and

available data on modes of action, the health effects from these six PFAS are expected to be

additive when present in mixtures. This is consistent with the basis for the drinking water health

advisory for the sum of PFOA and PFOS derived by the US USEPA (US USEPA 2016c), and

the approaches used for multiple PFAS by Massachusetts (MA DEP 2019), Vermont (VT DOH

2018), Connecticut (CT DPH 2020), Rhode Island (RI 2021), Maine (ME DHHS 2021), and

Oregon (Oregon Health Authority).

        The Department also evaluated the level of 30 ppt in the context of analytical detection

limits. The total concentration of six chemicals would be used to determine if the summed MCL

is exceeded, and analytical methods used to measure these chemicals in drinking water have



                                                49
limitations and variations in the concentration of the chemical that can be reliably reported. The

MCL cannot be set below the level that is reliably reported by the analytical method. The

analytical method must be able to reliably report each of the six PFAS at 5 ppt. Based on

analytical methods developed by US USEPA (US USEPA 2019b, 2020b), a level of 30 ppt for

the total concentration of six PFAS should retain confidence in the analytical results.

       Based on analysis of available toxicological data, the Department determined that

summing six PFAS compounds to 30 ppt addresses the additive toxicity of the chemicals in

situations where they are present as mixtures, and is also operationally feasible. It is expected

that approximately 2.14% of PWS will either exceed the proposed MCL of 10 ppt for PFHxS,

PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA or the PFAS6 MCL, for a total of 64 PWS.

       The toxicity of PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA has been discussed above. The results

of the human and animal studies on PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA and their structural

similarity to PFOA and PFOS provide an overall weight of evidence that indicates human

exposure to these chemicals at currently observed environmental levels can increase the risk for

health effects, and that public health actions to minimize such exposures are needed.

       The general methods presented by Department staff to the DWQC for deriving health-

based drinking water concentrations that are protective against noncancer health effects have

been regularly used by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US USEPA) and

other health agencies since the 1980s (US USEPA 2000, US USEPA 2020a, US USEPA 1984,

MDH 2008).

       The methods include:




                                                 50
           1. Identifying an exposure level or point of departure that represents the most

              sensitive noncancer health effect caused by the contaminant in the most sensitive

              species;

           2. Deriving a reference dose (a lifetime exposure at which noncancer health effects

              are unlikely) by dividing the point of departure by uncertainty factors that

              compensate for limitations in the quality and quantity of scientific information on

              the chemical and provide a margin of protection against the most sensitive health

              effects;

           3. Dividing the reference dose by a water consumption rate to obtain a drinking

              water exposure equivalence level; and

           4. Multiplying the drinking water equivalence level by a relative source contribution

              that adjusts for the percentage of exposure to the contaminant from drinking water

              compared to other sources (e.g., food, soil).

       On March 10, 2022, Department staff presented reference doses and health-based

drinking water concentrations for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA, and PFDA to the DWQC.

       The Department presented a PFHxS reference dose derived by the New Hampshire

Department of Environmental Services (NH DES 2019), based on a study by Chang et al. (2018)

that reported decreased litter size in mice exposed to PFHxS before mating and throughout

gestation. The Department presented this reference dose because it was based on an effect that

occurred at the lowest dose identified in a high-quality animal study. New Hampshire

Department of Environmental Services derived this reference dose from a benchmark serum

level (13,900 ng/mL), which was converted to a human equivalent dose of 1,200 ng/kg/day using

a chemical specific clearance value of 0.086 mL/kg/day. This human equivalent dose was



                                               51
divided by a total uncertainty factor of 300 to account for human variability (10), interspecies

differences (3), duration of exposure (3), and database deficiencies (3) to obtain a reference dose

of 4.0 ng/kg/day (NH DES 2019).

       The Department presented a PFNA reference dose derived by the Michigan Science

Advisory Workgroup (MI SAW 2019), based on a study by Das et al. (2015) that reported

decreased body weight and developmental delays in offspring of mice exposed during gestational

days 1-17. The Department presented this reference dose because it is based on a sensitive effect

during a vulnerable life stage identified in a high-quality animal study. The Michigan Science

Advisory Workgroup derived this reference dose from a serum concentration corresponding to a

no-observed adverse effect level for decreased body weight gain and delayed eye opening,

preputial separation, and vaginal opening in offspring of exposed mice (6,800 ng/mL). The

Michigan Science Advisory Workgroup converted this serum concentration to a human

equivalent dose of 665 ng/kg/day using a chemical specific clearance value of 0.098 mL/kg/day.

This human equivalent dose was divided by a total uncertainty factor of 300 to account for

human variability (10), interspecies differences (3), and database deficiencies (10) to obtain a

reference dose of 2.2 ng/kg/day (MI SAW 2019).

       Reference doses for PFHpA and PFDA are not available. For these PFAS, the

Department presented reference doses based on PFAS with similar chemical structures,

consistent with approaches used by Massachusetts, Maine, Rhode Island, Vermont, and

Connecticut (MA DEP 2019, ME DHHS 2021, RI 2021, VT DOH 2018, CT DPH 2020).

       In the absence of sufficient information to derive a PFHpA reference dose, the

Department proposed using the reference dose for PFOA to obtain a health-based water value for

this chemical. PFHpA is structurally similar to PFOA, and has a relatively long human half-life



                                                52
of 1.1-1.5 years (Zhang et al. 2013), similar to 2 to 3.5 years for PFOA (Bartell et al. 2010, Olsen

et al. 2007). These considerations suggest that it would have similar potency to PFOA. A PFOA

reference dose of 1.5 ng/kg/day derived by the Department and presented to the DWQC on

October 17, 2018 (NYS DOH 2018), was used as the basis for health-based drinking water

values for PFHpA. This reference dose is based on increased liver weight in the offspring of

mice exposed to PFOA during pregnancy (Macon et al., 2011). The measured serum level

corresponding to a lowest-observed effect level (4,980 ng/mL) was converted to a human

equivalent dose of 460 ng/kg/day using a chemical specific clearance value of 0.092 mL/kg/day.

The human equivalent dose was divided by a total uncertainty factor of 300 to account for

sensitive humans (10), interspecies differences (3), the use of a LOEL (3) and database

deficiencies (3) to obtain a final reference dose of 1.5 ng/kg/day.

       In the absence of sufficient information to derive a PFDA reference dose, the Department

proposed using the reference dose for PFNA to obtain a health-based water value for this

chemical. PFDA is structurally similar to PFNA and has a relatively long half-life of 4 to 12

years (Zhang et al. 2013), as does PFNA (2.5 to 4.4 years) (Zhang et al. 2013). In addition, a

comparative toxicity study conducted by The National Toxicology Program (NTP 2018b)

reported that PFDA induced liver and thyroid toxicity in laboratory animals at exposure levels

comparable to PFNA, which suggests that PFDA and PFNA have similar toxic potency. Thus,

the previously summarized reference dose for PFNA was used to calculate health-based values

for PFDA.

       To obtain the corresponding drinking water equivalence levels for PFHxS, PFHpA,

PFNA and PFDA, the reference doses were divided by water consumption rates of 0.035, 0.047

and 0.143 liters per kilogram body weight per day for adults, lactating women, and infants,



                                                 53
respectively (US USEPA 2019a). The drinking water equivalence levels for each chemical are

presented in Table 6.

       The drinking water equivalence levels, which represent the reference doses expressed as

water concentrations for different members of the population, were then multiplied by a relative

source contribution of 0.5. The relative source contribution accounts for the percentage of

contaminant exposure from drinking water compared to other sources when setting drinking

water standards and guidelines based on noncancer toxicological endpoints.

       The US USEPA drinking water program applies a default relative source contribution

factor of 0.2 to the reference dose in the absence of chemical-specific information (US USEPA

2020a). This default allows 20% of the reference dose to be applied to drinking water exposure

sources and 80% of the reference dose to be reserved for other environmental exposure sources.

However, data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (CDC 2021) provide

a source of chemical-specific information on the individual levels of PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and

PFDA in the blood of the general US population. These blood levels for the general US

population are much lower than the serum levels corresponding to each of the four reference

doses for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA, and PFDA. This suggests that environmental background

exposures (e.g., exposures other than drinking water) to these four PFAS account for a smaller

portion of the reference dose than the US USEPA default relative source contribution allocates.

Thus, the chemical-specific information for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA supports using a

relative source contribution of 0.5. This value is higher than the default of 0.2, but below the 0.8

ceiling recommended by the US USEPA to account for possible unknown sources of exposure to

these chemicals (US USEPA 2020a). The Minnesota Department of Health (MDH 2020a,b,c) the

Michigan Science Advisory Workgroup (MI SAW 2019), New Jersey Department of



                                                 54
Environmental Protection (NJ DEP 2015), New Hampshire Department of Environmental

Services (NH DES 2019), and Washington State Department of Health (WA DOH 2019), have

also used a relative source contribution of 0.5 in developing health-based drinking water

concentrations for PFAS.

         The resulting health-based water concentrations presented in Table 6, ranged from 14 to

57 ppt for PFHxS, 5 to 21 ppt for PFHpA, and 8 to 31 ppt for both PFNA and PFDA. From these

health-based water concentrations, the Department provided information to the Drinking Water

Quality Council indicating that a chemical-specific maximum contaminant level of 10 ppt each

for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA would be sufficiently protective of human health. The

Department also presented information indicating that a level of 10 ppt would be analytically

achievable for laboratories and would retain confidence in the analytical result. On May 2, 2022,

the Drinking Water Quality Council recommended maximum contaminant levels of 10 ppt each

for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA, and PFDA.


         Table 6 Health-Based Drinking Water Values for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA
                                                                                Health-Based
                Reference    Drinking Water     Drinking Water    Relative
                                                                                 Drinking
  Chemical        Dose       Ingestion Rates     Equivalency       Source
                                                                                Water Value
               (ng/kg/day)     (L/kg/day)         Level (ppt)    Contribution
                                                                                   (ppt)
 PFHxS             4.0                             28-114                          14-57
                             0.143 (infants)
 PFHpA             1.5                              10-43                          5-21
                             0.047 (lactating
                                                                     0.5
 PFNA              2.2       women)                 15-63                           8-31
                             0.035 (adults
 PFDA              2.2                              15-63                           8-31



         The Department evaluated the margin of protection against health effects provided by the

recommended maximum contaminant level by comparing the exposure at 10 ppt each of PFHxS,

PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA for infants (the population that would receive the largest contaminant

dose per body weight at 10 ppt) to the human equivalent doses corresponding to the lowest

                                                   55
exposure that causes health effects in animal studies. The margins of protection are provided in

Table 7 and ranged from 300 to 850, meaning that exposures at the proposed maximum

contaminant levels would be 300 to 850 times lower than PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA

exposures estimated to cause health effects in humans.


            Table 7 Margins of Protection at 10 ppt of PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA
                                                   Effect Level       Drinking Water
                                                                                          Margin of
 Chemical                 Effect                (human equivalent     Dose at 10 ppt
                                                                                          Protection
                                                 dose, ng/kg/day)   (infant, ng/kg/day)
              Reduced litter size in mice
              exposed before mating and
 PFHxS                                                1200                 1.4               857
              throughout gestation (Chang
              et al. 2018, NH DES 2019)
              Increased relative liver weight
              in offspring of mice exposed
 PFHpA                                                460                  1.4               329
              to PFOA on gestational days
              1-17 (Macon et al. 2011)
              Increased relative liver weight
              in pregnant mice exposed to
 PFNA                                                 431                  1.4               308
              PFNA (Das et al. 2015, NJ
              DEP 2015)
              Increased relative liver weight
              in pregnant mice exposed to
 PFDA                                                 431                  1.4               308
              PFNA (Das et al. 2015, NJ
              DEP 2015)



         The Department concluded that the margins of protection provided by the proposed

maximum contaminant level are sufficiently protective of public health. The proposed maximum

contaminant levels are also consistent with long-standing US USEPA practice for development

of drinking water standards, specifically, that health-based concentrations, or maximum

contaminant level goals for contaminants be set at levels where no known or anticipated adverse

effect on the health of persons would occur, allowing an adequate margin of safety, and that the

maximum contaminant levels be set as close to the maximum contaminant level goals as feasible

(US USEPA 2020a).



                                                       56
        The Department is amending 10 NYCRR Part 5 to establish individual MCLs for PFHxS,

PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA, as well as a combined MCL for PFAS6. The Department is

proposing an MCL of 0.0000100 mg/L (10 ppt) for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA as

individual contaminants, and 0.0000300 mg/L (30 ppt) for PFAS6. These MCLs will apply to all

public water systems regulated by the Department and provide a sufficient margin of protection

against adverse health effects in the most sensitive populations, including fetuses during

pregnancy, breastfed infants, and infants bottle fed with formula reconstituted using tap water. In

addition, the MCLs provide a sufficient margin of protection for lifetime exposure through

drinking water for the general population.

References

ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2021. Toxicological Profile for
Perfluoroalkyls. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. May 2021.
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp200.pdf.

Barry V, Winquist A, Steenland K. 2013. Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposures and incident cancers
among adults living near a chemical plant. Environmental Health Perspectives; 121:1313-1318.

Bartell SM, Calafat AM, Lyu C, Kato K, Ryan PB, Steenland K. 2010. Rate of decline in serum PFOA
concentrations after granular activated carbon filtration at two public water systems in Ohio and West
Virginia. Environmental Health Perspectives; 118(2):222-8.

Butenhoff JL, Ehresman DJ, Chang S-C, Parker GA, Stump DG. 2009. Gestational and lactational
exposure to potassium perfluorooctanesulfonate (K+PFOS) in rats: Developmental neurotoxicity.
Reproductive Toxicology; 27:319-330.

Butenhoff JL, Kennedy Jr GL, Chang S-C, Olsen GW. 2012a. Chronic dietary toxicity and
carcinogenicity study with ammonium perfluorooctanoate in Sprague-Dawley rats. Toxicology; 298:1-13.

Butenhoff JL, Chang S-C, Olsen GW, Thomford PJ. 2012b. Chronic dietary toxicity and carcinogenicity
study with potassium perfluorooctanesulfonate in Sprague Dawley rats. Toxicology; 293:1-15.

C8 Science Panel. 2017. The Science Panel Website. http://www.c8sciencepanel.org/index.html.

CA OEHHA (California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment). 2022. Notification Level
Recommendation for Perflourohexane Sulfonic Acid in Drinking Water. Accessed 5/12/2022
https://oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/water/document/pfhxsnl031722.pdf

                                                   57
Cakmak S, Lukina A, Karthikeyan S, Atlas E, Dales R. 2022. The association between blood PFAS
concentrations and clinical biochemical measures of organ function and metabolism in participants of the
Canadian Health Measures Survey (CHMS). Sci. Total Environ.; 827:153900.

CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2021. Fourth National Report on Human Exposure to
Environmental Chemicals Vol. 1 (Updated Tables, March 2021).
https://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/index.html

Chang S, Butenhoff JL, Parker GA, Coder PS, Zitzow JD, Krisko RM, Bjork JA, Wallace KB, Seed JG.
2018. Reproductive and developmental toxicity of potassium perfluorohexanesulfonate in CD-1 mice.
Reprod. Toxicol.; 78:150-168.

Clark, Dawn (The Chemours Company). 2021, March 17. Letter to USEPA, Office of Pollution
Prevention and Toxics regarding propanoic acid, 2,3,3,3-tetrafluoro-2-(1,1,2,2,3,3,3-
heptafluoropropoxy)-CAS RN 13252-13-6 (also known as HFPO-DA).
https://heronet.USEPA.gov/heronet/index.cfm/reference/details/reference_id/8631852.

Costa G. 2009. Thirty years of medical surveillance in perfluooctanoic acid production workers. Journal
of Occupational and Envtl Medicine; 51:364-372.

CT DPH (Connecticut Department of Public Health). 2020. Accessed 5/12/2022
https://www.ctwater.com/water-quality/what-are-pfas

Darrow L, Stein CR, Steenland K. 2013. Serum perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane sulfonate
concentrations in relation to birth outcomes in the mid-Ohio valley, 2005-2010. Environ. Health
Perspectives; 121:1207-1213.

Darrow L, Groth AC, Winquist A, Shin H-M, Bartell SM, Steenland K. 2016. Modeled perfluorooctanoic
acid (PFOA) exposure and liver function in a mid-Ohio Valley community. Environ. Health Perspectives;
124:1227–1233.

Das KP, Grey BE, Rosen MB, Wood CR, Tatum-Gibbs KR, Zehr RD, Strynar MJ, Lindstrom AB, Lau C.
2015. Developmental toxicity of perfluorononanoic acid in mice. Reprod Toxicol; 51:133-144.

DeWitt JC, Williams WC, Creech NJ, Luebke RW. 2015. Suppression of antigen-specific antibody
responses in mice exposed to perfluorooctanoic acid: Role of PPARα and T- and B-cell targeting. Journal
of Immunotoxicology; 13:38-45.

Dong G-H, Zhang Y-H, Zheng L, Liu W, Jin Y-H, He Q-C. 2009. Chronic effects of perfluorooctane
sulfonate exposure on immunotoxicity in adult male C57BL/6 mice. Archives of Toxicology; 83:805–815.

DuPont-18405-1307: E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company. 2010. H-28548: Subchronic Toxicity 90-
Day Gavage Study in Mice. OECD Test Guideline 408. Study conducted by E.I. du Pont de Nemours and
Company (Study Completion Date: February 19, 2010), Newark, DE.




                                                   58
ECHA (European Chemical Agency). 2020. Registration Dossier for 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-
tridecafluorooctanesulphonic acid (CAS No. 27619-27-2). Published in accordance with the Registration,
Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (i.e., REACH) legislation.
https://echa.europa.eu/registration-dossier/-/registered-dossier/24637/7/6/2

EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). 2011. Scientific Opinion of the Panel on Food Contact
Materials, Enzymes, Flavourings and Processing Aids on the safety evaluation of the substance, 3H-
perfluoro-3-[(3-methoxy-propoxy)propanoic acid], ammonium salt, CAS No. 958445-44-8, for use in
food contact materials. EFSA Journal.

EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). 2018. Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain, Scientific
Opinion: Risk to human health related to the presence of perfluorooctane sulfonic acid and
perfluorooctanoic acid in food. EFSA Journal; 16:5194.

EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). 2020. Scientific Opinion of the Panel on Contaminants in the
Food Chain: Risk to human health related to the presence of perfluoroalkyl substances in food. EFSA
Journal. https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2020.6223

Fei C, Weinberg CR, Olsen J. 2012. Commentary: Perfluorinated chemicals and time to pregnancy: A
link based on reverse causation? Epidemiology; 23:264-266.

Feng Y, Bai Y, Lu Y, Chen M, Fu M, Guan X, Cao Q, Yuan F, Jie J, Li M, Meng H, Wang C, Hong S,
Zhou Y, Zhang X, He M, Guo H. 2022. Plasma perfluoroalkyl substance exposure and incidence risk of
breast cancer: A case-cohort study in the Dongfeng-Tongji cohort. Environ Pollut; 306:119345.

Gleason JA, Post GB, Fagliano JA. 2015. Associations of perfluorinated chemical serum concentrations
and biomarkers of liver function and uric acid in the US population (NHANES), 2007-2010. Envtl.
Research; 136:8-14.

Gordon SC. 2011. Toxicological evaluation of ammonium 4,8-dioxa-3H-perfluorononanoate, a new
emulsifier to replace ammonium perfluorooctanoate in fluoropolymer manufacturing. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol. 2011 Feb;59(1):64-80.

Grandjean P, Andersen EW, Budtz-Jørgensen E, Nielsen F, Mølbak K, Weihe P, Heilmann C. 2012.
Serum vaccine antibody concentrations in children exposed to perfluorinated compounds. Journal of the
Am. Med. Assn; 307:391-397.

Grandjean P, Heilmann C, Weihe P, Flemming N, Mogensen UB, Budtz-Jørgensen E. 2017. Serum
vaccine antibody concentrations in adolescents exposed to perfluorinated compounds. Envtl. Health
Perspectives; 125:077018.

Guo J, Zhang J, Wang Z, Zhang L, Qi X, Zhang Y, Chang X, Wu C, Zhou Z. 2021. Umbilical cord serum
perfluoroalkyl substance mixtures in relation to thyroid function of newborns: Findings from Sheyang
Mini Birth Cohort Study. Chemosphere; 273:129664.

Han J-S, Jang S, Son H-Y, Kim Y-B, Kim Y, Noh J-H, Kim M-J, Lee B-S. 2020. Subacute dermal
toxicity of perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids: comparison with different carbon-chain lengths in human skin


                                                   59
equivalents and systemic effects of perfluoroheptanoic acid in Sprague Dawley rats. Archives of
Toxicology; 94:523-539.

Hardell E, Kärrman A, van Bavel B, Bao J, Carlberg M, Hardell L. 2014. Case-control study on
perfluorinated alkyl acids (PFAAs) and the risk of prostate cancer. Environ Int.; 63:35-9.

Kato H, Fujii S, Takahashi M, Matsumoto M, Hirata-Koizumi M, Ono A, Hirose A. 2015. Repeated dose
and reproductive/developmental toxicity of perfluorodecanoic acid in rats. Environ Toxicol. 30(11):1244

Kvalem HE, Nygaard UC, Lødrup Carlsen KC, Carlsen KH, Haug LS, Granum B. 2020 Perfluoroalkyl
substances, airways infections, allergy and asthma related health outcomes - implications of gender,
exposure period and study design. Environ Int.; 134:105259.

Lau C, Thibodeaux JR, Hanson RG, Narotsky MG, Rogers JM, Lindstrom AB, Strynar MJ. 2006. Effects
of perfluorooctanoic acid exposure during pregnancy in the mouse. Toxicological Sciences; 90:510-518.

Li Y, Xu Y, Scott K, Lindh C, Jakobsson K, Fletcher T. 2019. Half-lives of PFOA, PFPeS, PFHxS,
PFHpS and PFOS after end of exposure to contaminated drinking water. Environmental Epidemiology;
3:237.

Li Z, Li C, Wen Z, Yan H, Zou C, Li Y, Tian L, Lei Z, Li H, Wang Y, Zhong Y, G R-S. 2021.
Perfluoroheptanoic acid induces Leydig cell hyperplasia but inhibits spermatogenesis in rats after pubertal
exposure. Toxicology. 448(2021): 152633

Loveless S, Finlay C, Everds NE, Frame SR, Gillies PJ, O’Connor JC, Powley CR, Kennedy GL. 2006.
Comparative responses of rats and mice exposed to linear/branched, linear, or branched ammonium
perfluorooctanoate (APFO). Toxicology; 220:203–217.

Luebker DJ, Case MT, York RG, Moore JA, Hansen KJ, Butenhoff JL. 2005. Two-generation
reproduction and cross-foster studies of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) in rats. Toxicology; 2015:126-
148.

MA DEP (Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection). 2019. Technical Support Document:
Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS): An Updated Subgroup Approach to Groundwater and
Drinking Water Values. Accessed 5/10/2022 https://www.mass.gov/doc/per-and-polyfluoroalkyl-
substances-pfas-an-updated-subgroup-approach-to-groundwater-and/download

Macon MB, Villanueva LR, Tatum-Gibbs K, Zehr RD, Strynar MJ, Stanko JP, White SS, Helfant L, and
Fenton SE. 2011. Prenatal perfluorooctanoic acid exposure in CD-1 mice: Low dose developmental
effects and internal dosimetry. Toxicological Sciences; 121(1):134–145.

MDH (Minnesota Department of Health). 2008. Statement of Need and Reasonableness (SONAR) in the
Matter of Proposed Rules Relating to Health Risk Limits of Groundwater. Accessed 5/12/2022
https://www.leg.mn.gov/archive/sonar/SONAR-03733.pdf#page=2 .

MDH (Minnesota Department of Health). 2020a. Toxicological Summary for: Perfluorooctanoate.
Accessed 5/16/2022
https://www.health.state.mn.us/communities/environment/risk/docs/guidance/gw/pfoa.pdf

                                                    60
MDH (Minnesota Department of Health). 2020b. Toxicological Summary for: Perfluorooctane sulfonate.
Accessed 5/16/2022
https://www.health.state.mn.us/communities/environment/risk/docs/guidance/gw/pfos.pdf

MDH (Minnesota Department of Health). 2020c. Toxicological Summary for: Perfluorohexane sulfonate.
Accessed 5/16/2022
https://www.health.state.mn.us/communities/environment/risk/docs/guidance/gw/pfhxs.pdf

ME DHHS (Maine Department of Human Health Services). 2021
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getPDF.asp?paper=SP0064&item=3&snum=130

MI SAW (Michigan Science Advisory Workgroup). 2019. Health-Based Drinking Water Value
Recommendations for PFAS in Michigan. Accessed 5/12/2022 https://www.michigan.gov/pfasresponse/-
/media/Project/Websites/PFAS-Response/Documents/MPART/Reports/2019-Health-Based-Drinking-
Water-Value-Recommendations-PFAS-MI.pdf

NH DES (New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services). 2019. Technical Background Report
for the June 2019 Proposed Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) and Ambient Groundwater Quality
Standards (AGQSs) for Perfluorooctane sulfonic Acid (PFOS), Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA),
Perfluorononanoic Acid (PFNA), and Perfluorohexane sulfonic Acid (PFHxS). Accessed 5/10/2022
https://www4.des.state.nh.us/nh-pfas-investigation/wp-content/uploads/June-PFAS-MCL-Technical-
Support-Document-FINAL.pdf

NJ DEP (New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection) & New Jersey Drinking Water Quality
Institute Health Effects Subcommittee. 2015. Health-Based Maximum Contaminant Level Support
Document: Perfluorononanoic Acid (PFNA). Accessed 5/12/2022
https://www.nj.gov/dep/watersupply/pdf/pfna-health-effects.pdf

NJ DEP (New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection). 2019a. Technical Support Document:
Interim Specific Ground Water Criterion for Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA, C8).
https://www.nj.gov/dep/dsr/supportdocs/PFOA_TSD.pdf .

NJ DEP (New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection). 2019b. Technical Support Document:
Interim Specific Ground Water Criterion for Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS).
https://www.nj.gov/dep/dsr/supportdocs/PFOS_TSD.pdf .

NTP (National Toxicology Program). 2016. Monograph on Immunotoxicity Associated with Exposure to
Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS). Research Triangle Park, NC:
National Toxicology Program https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/ohat/pfoa_pfos/pfoa_pfosmonograph_508.pdf
.

NTP (National Toxicology Program). 2018a. TOX-96: 1-Perfluorobutanesulfonic acid (375-73-5),
Potassium perfluorohexanesulfonate (3871-99-6), Perfluorooctane sulfonate (1763-23-1), WY-14643
(50892-23-4). Chemical Effects in Biological Systems (CEBS). Research Triangle Park, NC (USA):
National Toxicology Program (NTP). Accessed 2022-03-08
https://cebs.niehs.nih.gov/cebs/publication/TOX-96

NTP (National Toxicology Program). 2018b. TOX-97: Perfluorohexanoic acid (307-24-4),
Perfluorooctanoic acid (335-67-1), Perfluorononanoic acid (375-95-1), Perfluorodecanoic acid (335-76-
2), WY-14643 (50892-23-4). Chemical Effects in Biological Systems (CEBS). Research Triangle Park,

                                                  61
NC (USA): National Toxicology Program (NTP). Accessed 2022-03-08.
https://cebs.niehs.nih.gov/cebs/publication/TOX-97NTP

NTP (National Toxicology Program). 2020. NTP technical report on the toxicology and carcinogenesis
studies of perfluorooctanoic acid (CASRN 335-67-1) administered in feed to Sprague Dawley
(Hsd:Sprague Dawley SD) rats. https://doi.org/10.22427/NTP-TR-598 .

NYS DOH (New York State Department of Health) October 17, 2018
https://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/water/drinking/dwqc/

Olsen GW, Burris JM, Burlew MM, Mandel JH. 2003. Epidemiologic assessment of worker serum
perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) concentrations and medical surveillance
examinations. Journal of Occupational and Envtl. Medicine; 45:260-270.

Olsen GW, Burris JM, Ehresman DJ, Froehlich JW, Seacat AM, Butenhoff JL, Zobel LR. 2007. Half-life
of serum elimination of perfluorooctanesulfonate,perfluorohexanesulfonate, and perfluorooctanoate in
retired fluorochemical production workers. Environ Health Perspect; 115(9):1298-305.

Oregon Health Authority. Per – and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) PFAS Drinking Water Health
Advisory Levels. Accessed 5/12/2022
https://www.oregon.gov/oha/PH/HEALTHYENVIRONMENTS/DRINKINGWATER/OPERATIONS/Pa
ges/PFAS.aspx

RI (Rhode Island) 2021. PFAS in Drinking Water, Groundwater and Surface Waters.
http://webserver.rilin.state.ri.us/BillText21/SenateText21/S0107.pdf

Shearer JJ, Callahan CL, Calafat AM, Huang W-Y, Jones RR, Sabbisetti VS, Freedman ND, Sampson
JN, Silverman DT, Purdue MP, Hofmann JN. 2021. Serum Concentrations of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl
Substances and Risk of Renal Cell Carcinoma. Journal of the Natl. Cancer Inst.; 113(5):580-587.

Shen M, Xiao Y, Huang Y, Jing D, Su J, Luo D, Duan Y, Xiao S, Li J, Chen X. 2022. Perfluoroalkyl
substances are linked to incident chronic spontaneous urticaria: A nested case-control study.
Chemosphere; 287(Pt 3):132358.

Sheng N, Zhou X, Zheng1 F,·Pan Y, Guo X ,·Guo Y, Sun Y. 2017. Comparative hepatotoxicity of 6:2
fluorotelomer carboxylic acid and 6:2 fluorotelomer sulfonic acid, two fluorinated alternatives to
longchain‑ perfluoroalkyl acids, on adult male mice. Arch Toxicol; 91(8):2909–2919.

Shi Y, Vestergren R, Xu L, Zhou Z, Li C, Liang Y, Cai Y. 2016. Human Exposure and Elimination
Kinetics of Chlorinated Polyfluoroalkyl Ether Sulfonic Acids (Cl-PFESAs). Environ. Sci. Technol.;
50(5):2396-2404.

Steenland K, Tinker S, Frisbee S, Ducatman A, Vaccarino V. 2009. Association of perfluorooctanoic acid
and perfluorooctane sulfonate with serum lipids among adults living near a chemical plant. Am. Journal
of Epidemiology; 170:1268-1278.

Steenland K, Woskie S. 2012. Cohort mortality study of workers exposed to perfluorooctanoic acid. Am.
Journal of Epidemiology; 176:909-917.

                                                  62
Steenland K, Zhao L, Winquist A, Parks C. 2013. Ulcerative colitis and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in
a highly exposed population of community residents and workers in the mid-Ohio valley. Envtl. Health
Perspectives; 121: 900-905.

Takahashi M, Ishida S, Hirata-Koizumi M, Ono A, Hirose A. 2014. Repeated dose and
reproductive/developmental toxicity of perfluoroundecanoic acid in rats. The Journal of Toxicological
Sciences; 39(1):97-108.

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 1984. National Primary Drinking Water
Regulations: Volatile Synthetic Organic Chemicals, 49 Fed Reg 24330-24355.

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2000. Methodology for Deriving Ambient
Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health USEPA-822-B-00-004,
https://www.USEPA.gov/sites/production/files/2018-10/documents/methodology-wqcprotection-hh-
2000.pdf

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2016a. Health Effects Support Document
for Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA), USEPA 822-R-16-003.
https://www.USEPA.gov/sites/production/files/2016-05/documents/pfoa_hesd_final_508.pdf .

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2016b. Health Effects Support Document
for Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS), USEPA 822-R-16-002.
https://www.USEPA.gov/sites/production/files/2016-05/documents/pfos_hesd_final_508.pdf .

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2016c. Fact Sheet: PFOA and PFOS
Drinking Water Health Advisories. Accessed 5/17/2022 https://www.USEPA.gov/sites/default/files/2016-
06/documents/drinkingwaterhealthadvisories_pfoa_pfos_updated_5.31.16.pdf

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2019a. Update for Chapter 3 of the
Exposure Factors Handbook: Ingestion of Water and Other Select Liquids. Accessed 5/17/2022
https://www.USEPA.gov/sites/default/files/2019-02/documents/efh_-_chapter_3_update.pdf

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2019b. Method 533: Determination of
Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Drinking Water by Isotope Dilution Anion Exchange Solid Phase
Extraction and Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry. USEPA Document Number 815-B-
19-020. December 2019. https://www.USEPA.gov/dwanalyticalmethods/method-533-determination-and-
polyfluoroalkyl-substances-drinking-water-isotope

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2020a. USEPA Regulates Drinking Water
Contaminants https://www.USEPA.gov/sdwa/how-USEPA-regulates-drinking-water-contaminants
US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2020b. UCMR5 Laboratory Approval
Manual. Version 1.0. USEPA Document Number 815-B-20-007. December 2020.
https://www.USEPA.gov/dwucmr/laboratory-approval-program-unregulated-contaminant-monitoring-
rule-ucmr-5




                                                   63
US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2021a. Human Health Toxicity Values for
Hexafluoropropylene Oxide (HFPO) Dimer Acid and Its Ammonium Salt (CASRN 13252-13-6 and
CASRN 62037-80-3): Also Known as “GenX Chemicals.” USEPA Document Number 822R-21-010.
October 2021.

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2021b. IRIS Toxicological Review of
Perfluorobutanoic Acid (PFBA) and Related Salts (Public Comment and External Review Draft, 2021).
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, USEPA/635/R-20/424, 2021.

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2021c. Human Health Toxicity Values for
Perfluorobutane Sulfonic Acid (CASRN 375-73-5) and Related Compound Potassium Perfluorobutane
Sulfonate (CASRN 29420-49-3). USEPA Document Number USEPA/600/R-20/345F. April 2021.

US USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2022. IRIS Toxicological Review of
Perfluorohexanoic Acid (PFHxA) and Related Salts (Public Comment and External Review Draft). U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. USEPA Document Number USEPA/635/R-21/312.
February 2022.

Velarde MC, Chan AFO, Sajo MEJV, Zakharevich I, Melamed J, Uy GLB, Teves JMY, Corachea AJM,
Valparaiso AP, Macalindong SS, Cabaluna ND, Dofitas RB, Giudice LC, Gerona RR. 2022. Elevated
levels of perfluoroalkyl substances in breast cancer patients within the Greater Manila Area.
Chemosphere; 286(Pt 1):131545.

Verner M-A, Loccisano AE, Morken N-H, Yoon M, Wu H, McDougall R, Maisonet M, Marcus M, Kishi
R, Miyashita C, Chen M-H, Hsieh W-S, Andersen ME, Clewell 3rd HJ, Longnecker MP. 2015.
Associations of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) with lower birth weight: An evaluation of potential
confounding by glomerular filtration rate using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model (PBPK).
Envtl. Health Perspectives; 123:1317-1324.

VT DOH (Vermont Department of Health). 2018. Drinking Water Health Advisory for Five PFAS (per-
and polyfluorinated alkyl substances). Accessed 5/12/2022
https://www.healthvermont.gov/sites/default/files/documents/pdf/ENV_DW_PFAS_HealthAdvisory.pdf

WA DOH (Washington Department of Health). 2019. Draft Recommended State Action Levels for Per-
and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in Drinking Water: Approach, Methods and Supporting
Information. Accessed 10/13/2021 at:
https://www.doh.wa.gov/Portals/1/Documents/4200/PFASToxicologicalAssessment.pdf

Wang B, Fu J, Gao K, Liu Q, Zhuang L, Zhang G, Long M, Na J, Ren M, Wang A, Liang R, Shen G, Li
Z, Lu Q. 2021. Early pregnancy loss: Do Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances matter? Environ Int.;
157:106837.

Wielsøe M, Kern P, Bonefeld-Jørgensen EC. 2017. Serum levels of environmental pollutants is a risk
factor for breast cancer in Inuit: a case control study. Environ Health.; 16(1):56.

Winquist and Steenland. 2014. Perfluorooctanoic acid exposure and thyroid disease in community and
worker cohorts. Epidemiology; 25:255-264.


                                                 64
Xu Y, Fletcher T, Pineda D, Lindh CH, Nilsson C, Glynn A, Vogs C, Norstrom K, Lilja K, Jakobsson K,
Li Y. 2020. Serum half-lives for short- and long-chain perfluoroalkyl acids after ceasing exposure from
drinking water contaminated by firefighting foam. Environmental Health Perspectives; 128(7):077004-1.

Zhang Y, Beesoon S, Zhu L, Martin JW. 2013. Biomonitoring of perfluoroalkyl acids in human urine and
estimates of biological half-life. Environ Sci Technol; 47(18):10619-10627.

Zhang H, Zhou NS, Cui R, Cui Q, Guo H, Guo Y, Sun Y, Dai J. 2018. Subchronic Hepatotoxicity Effects
of 6:2 Chlorinated Polyfluorinated Ether Sulfonate (6:2 Cl-PFESA), a Novel Perfluorooctanesulfonate
(PFOS) Alternative, on Adult Male Mice. Environ. Sci. Technol.; 52(21):12809.


Costs:

Compliance Costs for the Implementation of, and Continuing Compliance with the

Regulation to the Regulated Entity

         The proposed regulation will require compliance with emerging contaminant monitoring,

emerging contaminant notification levels and monitoring and treatment associated with the

proposed PFAS MCLs. An overview of cost information for each of these elements is presented

below.

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements (ECMR):

         PHL § 1112, and thus the ECMR, applies to each PWS that serves at least five service

connections used by year-round residents or that regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents,

defined in the SSC as a community water system (CWS); or a PWS that regularly serves at least

twenty-five of the same people, four hours or more per day, for four or more days per week, for

26 or more weeks per year, defined in the SSC as a nontransient noncommunity water system

(NTNC). The ECMR applies to approximately 3,550 PWS that may be either privately owned or

publicly owned. The cost of the ECMR includes the cost of laboratory analysis for each PWS as

well as the cost to the Department for administering the ECMR program.




                                                  65
       The ECMR will be modeled after the Environmental Protection Agency’s (USEPA) fifth

Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule, 40 CFR 141.40 (UCMR5), to allow samples

collected under UCMR5 to be used to satisfy the requirements of the ECMR. Consistent with

UCMR5, ECMR will require that one sample set be collected per entry point. It is estimated that

approximately 3,550 PWS will be required to monitor at 5,247 locations. All PWS must use

USEPA Method 533: Determination of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Drinking Water

by Isotope Dilution Anion Exchange Solid Phase Extraction and Liquid

Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry to comply with this requirement. The cost of

analysis for this method may vary based on the laboratory selected, and whether a field reagent

blank is analyzed in accordance with the approved method. It is estimated to cost between $350

and $700 per sample. Estimated sampling costs are based on estimates prepared by USEPA and

surveys of laboratories certified by the ELAP. This estimate does not include the cost of labor to

collect and transport the sample. The cost per average water system, based on 1.7 entry points

per system is between $595 and $1,190 per PWS; total costs will be proportional to the number

of entry points. The number of entry points does not always correspond with system size,

meaning, large water systems may have one entry point where small systems may have multiple.

Table 8 provides a range of sampling costs based on the estimated number of samples that will

be required.

               Table 8: Impacts on the regulated community – Emerging Contaminants
                                      Monitoring Requirements
        System Type           Number of        Estimated    Low cost per    High cost per
                             water systems     number of    sample ($350)   sample ($700)
                                                samples
 Community Water Systems     2,837           4,797          1,678,950       3,357,900
 Nontransient noncommunity   713             1,084          379,400         758,800
 Total                                                      $2,058,350      $4,116,700




                                                66
       The UCMR5 requires each PWS serving more than 10,000 people to monitor at their own

expense. For PWS serving between 3,300 and 10,000 people, amendments to the American

Water Infrastructure Act (AWIA) Section 2021(a) required that USEPA collect monitoring data

from all systems serving more than 3,300 people “subject to the availability of appropriations”.

Similarly, USEPA is required under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) Section

1445(a)(2)(C)(ii) to pay the “reasonable cost of such testing and laboratory analysis” for all

applicable PWS serving 25 to 10,000 people. This means that if appropriations are made, the

USEPA will pay the cost of analysis for each PWS that serves between 3,300 and 10,000 people

as well as a small national subset of PWS serving 25 to 3,300 people.

       The effective date of this ECMR program has been established to align with the UCMR5

to ensure that the cost of analysis is minimized by allowing a PWS to use the same samples

under both programs. For the ECMR, pursuant to PHL § 1112, samples must be collected by a

laboratory certified by the Department’s Environmental Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP).

Not all laboratories certified under UCMR5 are ELAP certified. There are no similar programs

available currently for each PWS that serves 3,300 people or fewer. These water systems

generally do not participate in UCMR5 and will be required to pay for their own monitoring

under the ECMR.

       The cost of continued compliance will depend on many factors, including the

concentration of compounds detected during initial monitoring and whether any MCLs are

exceeded. The cost per sample is expected to be the same for continued compliance as it is for

initial monitoring.




                                                67
Notification Levels (NL):

        There are 3,549 PWS that will be required to monitor for emerging contaminants and

must provide public notification when levels are confirmed to be at or above the notification

level. The Department estimates that 0.12% or four (4) PWS that monitor for emerging

contaminants will have monitoring results that are equal to or exceed the category 1 notification

level of 30 ppt and 2.5% or 87 PWS will have monitoring results that are equal to or exceed the

notification level of 100 ppt. The Department estimates a notification cost of $5 per service

connection unit including labor, fees and postage, however larger systems may pay a much lower

per unit cost for notification. Similarly, a water system that can hand deliver notices may pay a

lower per unit cost. Many PWS that will provide notification are currently providing public

notification due to an MCL exceedance. The cost per water system will vary significantly

depending on the size of the water system and the method of notification selected. Table 9

demonstrates the expected number of PWS that will exceed both the category 1 and category 2

notification levels.


             Table 9 – Expected Number of Systems at or Above the Notification Level
               System Type                 Number of           Category 1       Category 2
                                          water systems       Notifications    Notifications
 Community Water Systems                 2,837            3                   70
 Nontransient noncommunity               713              1                   17
 Total                                                    4                   87




Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCL):

        Community Water Systems (CWS) and non-transient noncommunity (NTNC) water

systems will begin monitoring for PFNA, PFDA, PFHxS, PFHpA beginning April 1 of 2023.

There are approximately 3,000 PWS that will be required to routinely monitor for these


                                                68
compounds. Water systems that have previously monitored for these compounds and have

confirmed the data by collecting between one and three follow-up samples can use existing data

to determine whether an MCL is exceeded. If a PWS has not monitored for these compounds

previously or if the presence of these compounds has not been confirmed, the PWS will be

required to collect samples in 2023. Each PWS will be required to comply with the MCL by

completing a State approved corrective action by January 1, 2025. A PWS that is not in

compliance by this date will be considered in violation of the MCL.

       The proposed regulation also modifies the analytical and reporting requirements.

Effective April 1, 2023, each PWS must use USEPA 537.1: Determination of Selected Per- and

Polyfluorinated Alkyl Substances in Drinking Water by Solid Phase Extraction and Liquid

Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) or USEPA 533: Determination of

Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Drinking Water by Isotope Dilution Anion Exchange

Solid Phase Extraction and Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry. All compounds

in the approved analytical method must be reported to the State by the laboratory conducting the

analysis to ensure that the State can review quality assurance/quality control information and any

case narrative prepared by the laboratory. This change in monitoring requirements will require

any laboratory that subcontracts analytical services to provide documentation from the laboratory

conducting the analysis in addition to any summary that is prepared. The Department estimates

that the cost of the full analytical method using either USEPA 537.1 or USEPA 533 will be

between $350 and $700 per sample. It is difficult to estimate the cost for each water system,

since each water system has a different number of sources. In addition, the total number of

samples from each source that a PWS must collect is unknown since the number of samples




                                               69
required is based on compliance monitoring results, with less sampling required when no

contaminants are detected versus when contaminants are detected above and below the MCL.

       This proposal includes modifications which clarify requirements that initial monitoring

for PFAS compounds are at the source for all water systems regardless of size. The proposal

gives the State discretion to move the compliance point to entry point based on specific system

operation or the presence of treatment for PFAS compounds. There are 6,312 active sources in

the Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS). Table 10 provides a range of sample

costs by source water type, based on the minimum number of samples required.



  Table 10: Analytical Costs of sampling for PFNA, PFDA, PFHxS, PFHpA and PFAS6 for 3,000
                                       public water systems
 Source Type         Minimum Number        Number of        Cost per source     Cost per source
                     of samples required   sources          type low ($)        type high ($)
 Surface Water       4                     306              428,400             856,800
 Ground Water        2                     5,888            4,121,600           8,243,200
 Spring              2                     111              77,700              155,400
 Other               4                     7                9,800               19,600
 Total                                     6,312            $4,637,500          $9,275,000

Costs to Private Regulated Parties:

       There are approximately 7,200 privately owned PWS in NYS. Of these, an estimated

2,100 systems serve residential suburban areas, manufactured housing communities and

apartment buildings, residential and non-residential health care facilities, industrial and

commercial buildings, private schools and colleges, and other facilities. The remaining 5,100

privately owned PWS serve restaurants, convenient stores, motels, campsites and other transient

systems.




                                                 70
Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements (ECMR):

       The ECMR apply to approximately 3,500 CWS and NTNC. Mobile home parks,

homeowners’ associations that operate their own PWS, daycares, private schools, office

buildings and investor-owned utilities are the types of private parties regulated by the

Department and will be required to monitor for emerging contaminants. The exact costs for

monitoring for emerging contaminants for each PWS, including privately-owned PWS, cannot

be determined due to several variables. Monitoring costs for a privately-owned PWS is

dependent upon the system size, the number of affected entry points and the levels of each

contaminant. The Department does not maintain ownership records for each PWS, but it is

estimated that a significant percentage of the approximately 2,200 PWS that serve less than

1,000 people are privately owned. Pursuant to PHL § 1112 the proposed regulation requires

sampling of water systems that serve as few as five service connections and serve fewer than 25

people. These very small systems are typically privately owned and represent primarily mobile

home parks or a small group of residents with a common source of drinking water. There are

approximately 550 very small PWS that will be required to comply with these requirements. The

total cost to the 550 very small water systems is anticipated to be $327,250-$654,500 or between

$595 and $1,190 per water system based on 1.7 entry points. The total estimated cost to water

systems that serves less than 1,000 people is $1,309,000 and $2,618,000, or similarly between

$595 and $1,190 per PWS based on an average of 1.7 entry points.

Notification Levels (NL):

       The cost of notices is estimated to be $5 per service connection, depending on the size of

the PWS, which includes privately owned PWS.




                                                71
Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCL):

       The costs to private regulated parties include monitoring and notification costs for

community water systems and nontransient noncommunity water systems; routine compliance

monitoring for PFAS6, and treatment costs for each PWS that exceeds the MCLs.

       Monitoring and treatment costs for each privately-owned PWS is dependent upon the

system size, the number of affected entry points/sources and the concentration of each

contaminant. The exact costs to PWS, including privately-owned PWS, for monitoring and

treatment for emerging contaminants as well as PFAS6 cannot be determined due to several

variables. The cost for a single sample for emerging contaminants is between $350-$700 per

sample using USEPA method 537.1 or 533, including the cost of field reagent blank.

       It is estimated that 14% of water systems would exceed the PFAS6 MCL of 30 ppt;

however, many of these PWS already exceed the MCL for PFOA and/or PFOS or have an

enforcement deferral for these compounds and are working towards or have achieved corrective

action that is expected to also address these compounds. It is expected that an additional 46 PWS

or 1.56% will exceed the MCL of 30 ppt for PFAS6. It is expected that approximately 2.14% of

PWS will either exceed the proposed MCL of 10 ppt for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA or

the PFAS6 MCL, for a total of 64 PWS. These PWS may be either publicly owned or private.

       The USEPA has developed a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) cost estimating tool for

different PFAS treatment options. Depending on the treatment option selected and the size of the

system, USEPA’s WBS tool provides estimated annualized costs per system size as shown in

Table 11.




                                               72
                                Table 11 – Estimate Annualized Costs for Treatment

   Total Annualized Costs                                                        Population     Population   Population
                                               Population         Population
 (Direct, indirect and add-on    Population                                       Served          Served       Served
                                              Served 501 to      Served 3,301
     capital plus annual        Served ≤500                                      10,001 to       50,001 to   100,001 to
                                                  3,300            to 10,000
 operation and maintenance)                                                       50,000          100,000     500,000
 Treatment          Midpoint
 Costs:                          $25,000        $110,900          $412,200       $1,246,400     $2,799,400   $8,947,800
                    Estimate
 Granular
 Activated                                                                                      $2,281,900   $7,255,600
                                $19,800 to     $87,700 to        $335,000 to    $1,016,000 to
 Carbon              Range                                                                          to            to
                                 $30,300        $134,000          $489,500       $1,476,900
                                                                                                $3,316,800   $10,640,000
 Treatment        Midpoint
                                 $19,500        $74,000           $262,400        $869,700      $2,036,400   $7,339,100
 Costs: Ion       Estimate
 Exchange                                                                                       $1,623,400   $5,777,400
                                $15,000 to     $59,100 to        $212,400 to    $692,700 to
                    Range                                                                           to           to
                                 $24,000        $88,900           $312,300      $1,046,600
                                                                                                $2,449,300   $8,900,800
 Treatment        Midpoint
                                 $17,800        $128,500          $449,600
 Costs: Point     Estimate
                                                                                    Not            Not           Not
 of Use
                                 $1,700 to     $33,800 to        $223,100 to     applicable     applicable    applicable
 Reverse            Range
                                  $33,800       $223,100          $676,000
 Osmosis

         These estimated costs are based on 2020 dollars and incorporate a 3% discounting rate

over approximately 20 years. Given recent supply-chain challenges for different components of

these treatment systems and higher inflationary pressures, actual annualized estimates could be

higher than the ranges presented by USEPA.

         Each PWS will likely make rate adjustments to accommodate these additional capital and

operational costs. Municipally owned PWSs may qualify for federal or state loans or grants to

offset some of the capital investment for treatment system components or upgrades. Most

privately owned water systems do not qualify for grants but are able to take advantage of loans.



Cost to the Department of Health:

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements:

         The Department will incur costs to implement the ECMR. The Department’s

responsibilities will involve regulatory oversight, program implementation, enforcement and

limited sampling assistance to the smallest water systems. Three employees will need to be hired

at a cost of $397,000 to the Department. This cost includes salary, fringe and indirect costs. The

                                                            73
Department will also need to procure equipment for data management at a cost of $285,000. The

total anticipated cost to the Department is $682,000.



Notification Levels:

       The Department will incur costs associated with tracking public notices and completing

enforcement if notices are not delivered. The cost of these services is included in the $397,000

cost for personnel detailed above.



Maximum Contaminant Levels:

       The proposed regulation will also create administrative costs to the Department and local

health departments related to implementation and oversight of the drinking water monitoring

requirements including review and approval of sampling schedules; review and reporting of

sample results; providing technical assistance to the PWS; review and approval of engineering

plans (i.e., treatment plans); and activities associated with enforcement and public notification.

The cost to the State for these services is included in the $397,000 cost for personnel detailed

above. The cost to local health departments that provide environmental health services on behalf

of the Department will vary significantly, depending on the number of PWS in a county and how

many of the PWS exceed the MCL.

       Additionally, the Department and NYS Department of Environmental Conservation

(NYSDEC) will incur costs associated with the investigation, remediation, and long-term

monitoring associated with the release of these contaminants.

       Although the proposed regulations do not apply to private wells, costs will be incurred by

NYSDEC, as the lead agency for investigating, remediating, and monitoring of contaminated



                                                 74
sites, as the MCLs will be used by the NYSDEC as guidance to determine whether a private well

in NYS is contaminated by PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA, PFDA and/or PFAS6. There are an

estimated 800,000 private water supply wells in NYS. At this time, it is not possible to estimate

the number of private wells that might be affected by contamination and therefore costs to

NYSDEC cannot be determined.



Cost to State and Local Government:

       The regulations will apply to local governments—including towns, villages, counties,

cities, and authorities or area wide improvement districts—which own or operate a PWS subject

to this regulation. There are approximately 1,500 PWS that are owned or operated by local

governments.

       In addition, State agencies that operate a PWS will be required to comply with the

proposed amendments. There are approximately 250 State-owned or operated facilities with a

PWS. Examples of such facilities are State-owned schools, office buildings, correctional

facilities, Thruway service areas, and any other State-owned structure or property.

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements:

       The cost per average water system, based on 1.7 entry points per system is between $595

and $1,190 per water system. As a result, the total cost to State and local government is expected

to be between $1,041,250 and $2,082,500. Alignment with the Federal UCMR5 will decrease the

overall cost burden to local government, by reducing duplication of effort. Local governments

with water systems that serve 3,300 and fewer people will be required to pay for monitoring as

well as a PWS that serves between 3,300 and 10,000 that either do not have USEPA funded




                                                75
samples analyzed by a ELAP certified laboratory or if USEPA is unable to support the analytical

costs associated with UCMR5 for a PWS that serve between 3,300 and 10,000 people.



Notification Levels:

       Department estimates a notification cost of $5 per service connection unit including

labor, fees and postage; however, larger systems may pay a much lower per unit cost for

notification. Similarly, a water system that can hand deliver notices may pay a lower per unit

cost. The cost per water system will vary significantly depending on the size of the water system

and the method of notification selected.



Maximum Contaminant Levels:

       The costs to state and local government owned PWS include monitoring and notification

costs for CWS and NTNC water systems; routine compliance monitoring for PFAS6, and

treatment costs for each PWS that exceeds the MCLs. There are approximately 1,500 PWS

owned by local government and 250 PWS owned by State government.

       Monitoring and treatment costs for each PWS owned by local government is dependent

upon the system size, the number of affected entry points/sources and the concentration of each

contaminant. The exact costs for monitoring and treatment for emerging contaminants as well as

PFAS6 for the PWS, including a PWS owned by local government, cannot be determined due to

several variables. The cost for a single sample is between $350-$700 per sample using USEPA

Method 537.1 or 533, including the cost of field reagent blank.

       It is estimated that 14% of water systems would exceed the PFAS6 MCL of 30 ppt;

however, many of these PWS already exceed the MCL for PFOA and/or PFOS or have an



                                                76
enforcement deferral for these compounds and are working towards or have achieved corrective

action that is expected to also address these compounds. It is expected that an additional 27 PWS

owned by state or local government or 1.56% is expected to exceed the MCL of 30 ppt for

PFAS6. It is expected that approximately 2.14% of PWS will either exceed the proposed MCL of

10 ppt for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA or the PFAS6 MCL, for a total of 37 PWS owned

by State or local government.

       The USEPA has developed a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) cost estimating tool for

different PFAS treatment options. Depending on the treatment option selected and the size of the

system, USEPA’s WBS tool provides estimated annualized costs per system size as shown in

Table 11.

       Local health departments that regulate drinking water will also incur administrative costs

related to local implementation and oversight of the drinking water monitoring requirements

including review and approval of sampling schedules; review and reporting of sample results;

providing technical assistance to the PWS; review and approval of plans (i.e., treatment plans);

and activities associated with enforcement and public notification of MCL exceedances.

       Each PWS owned by local government will likely make rate adjustments to

accommodate these additional capital and operational costs. Municipally owned PWSs may

qualify for federal or state loans or grants to offset some of the capital investment for treatment

system components or upgrades. Most PWS owned by State government, such as correctional

facilities or schools, do not have ratepayers.



Local Government Mandates:




                                                 77
       Local governments that own or operate a PWS will be required to comply with this

regulation as noted above for ECMR, notification levels and MCLs. There will be no impacts to

local governments that do not own or maintain a PWS.



Paperwork:

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements (ECMR) and Notification Levels (NL):

       The ECMR creates a new monitoring and regulatory program with associated paperwork,

tracking and enforcement. Each PWS will be required to monitor for emerging contaminants and

submit these results to the Department. They will be required to perform additional calculations

to determine if they are in violation of any MCL as well as report any compounds at or above the

notification level to the Department within 24 hours. The Department will be required to track

water system compliance with these new regulations, and initiate enforcement when a water

system fails to meet its regulatory obligations. This will require careful record keeping ensuring

successful enforcement and ultimate compliance with the regulatory requirements.



Maximum Contaminant Levels:

       The additional monitoring, reporting, recordkeeping and paperwork needed for PFAS6 is

expected to be minimal because operators of a PWS are currently required to keep such records

for existing MCLs, and these regulations add four additional chemicals. The reporting and

recordkeeping requirements will increase if MCLs are exceeded and/or treatment is required.



Duplication:

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements:



                                                78
       The ECMR is duplicative with the UCMR5 requirements for a PWS that serves 3,300 or

more people. To minimize duplication, the monitoring period in the proposed regulation has

been aligned with the UCMR where possible, and samples collected under UCMR will count

towards ECMR monitoring requirements when samples collected under UCMR are analyzed by

an ELAP approved laboratory.



Notification Levels:

       There will be no duplication of existing State or federal regulations.



Maximum Contaminant Levels:

       There will be no duplication of existing State or federal regulations.


Alternatives:

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements:

       The ECMR has been adopted into PHL § 1112, which requires the Commissioner to

adopt regulations. No other alternatives were considered. The financial impact to a PWS that

serves fewer than 3,300 people can be mitigated if the Department implements the program

directly and assists small PWS with the cost of monitoring.



Notification Levels:

       The NL program has been adopted into PHL § 1112, which requires the Commissioner to

adopt regulations. The notification levels in the regulation were developed by the Department

and recommended by the DWQC based on the best available scientific data. No other

alternatives were considered.

                                                79
Maximum Contaminant Levels:

Three alternatives to MCLs were considered:

1. maintain the existing MCL of 0.05 mg/L that applies to all unspecified organic chemicals

when no chemical specific MCL exists for PFNA, PFHxS, PFHpA and PFDA;

2. wait for the US USEPA to issue a federal MCL; or

3. promulgate an MCL for PFNA, PFHxS, PFHpA and PFDA at 10 ppt each.

       Based on deliberations of the DWQC and the additional toxicological analysis conducted

by the Department it was determined that the current MCL of 0.05 mg/L, which is a generic

standard for a broad class of organic chemicals, is not protective of public health for these four

specific chemicals. Waiting for the USEPA to set a new MCL was impractical due to the

prevalence and concerns surrounding PFNA, PFHxS, PFHpA and PFDA combined with the

timeframes required under the Safe Drinking Water Act.

       The 10 ppt standard, while health protective, will allow for a total concentration of

upwards of 60 ppt, which is not sufficiently health protective.

       The DWQC recommended that the Department review scientific data and propose a

regulatory approach to sum PFOA, PFOS, PFDA, PFHxS, PFNA, and PFHpA. This has been

called PFAS6. Based on a review of the occurrence of these compounds and available

toxicological data, the Department proposes MCLs of 10 ppt each for perfluorohexanesulfonic

acid (PFHxS), perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), and

perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA). Based on available health effects information, the Department

also proposes a MCL of 30 ppt for the sum of PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA.




                                                 80
       The Department determined that summing six PFAS compounds to 30 ppt addresses the

additive toxicity of the chemicals in situations where they are present as mixtures and is also

operationally feasible.



Federal Standards:

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements

       This proposal is similar to UCMR5 in that it is a monitoring rule for unregulated

contaminants in drinking water. This proposal expands the scope of UCMR5 by extending

applicability to a PWS that serves fewer than 3,300 persons.



Notification Levels:

       There are no federal standards for notification levels.



Maximum Contaminant Levels:

       There are no federal MCLs for PFDA, PFHpA, PFHxS, PFNA or PFAS6.



Compliance Schedule:

Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements (ECMR):

       Each PWS will begin monitoring for emerging contaminants beginning April 1, 2023. A

PWS may monitor in accordance with the schedule established by USEPA for UCMR. A PWS

that is not required to participate in UCMR5 will have a monitoring schedule issued by the

Department.




                                                81
Notification Levels:

       The effective date for NLs is April 1, 2023. Public notification is required for each PWS

that detects emerging contaminants at or above the notification level on or after this date.



Maximum Contaminant Levels:

       All water systems must begin monitoring for PFAS6 beginning April 1, 2023. A PWS

that has conducted monitoring prior to April 1, 2023 for PFAS as a result of the MCLs for PFOA

and PFOS may count this monitoring towards the this requirement as long as this monitoring

meets all the requirements of this proposed regulation. For example, there must be at least two

quarters of monitoring with all of the compounds in the analytical method reported; USEPA

methods 537.1 or 533 must be used; and analysis must be performed by an ELAP approved

laboratory. If the MCL is exceeded or compounds are detected at or above the notification level,

public notification is required. The requirement to report all compounds in the approved

analytical method will begin on April 1, 2023. Water systems must implement corrective action

and be in compliance with the MCLs by January 1, 2025.



Contact Person:

Katherine Ceroalo
New York State Department of Health
Bureau of Program Counsel, Regulatory Affairs Unit
Corning Tower Building, Rm. 2438
Empire State Plaza
Albany, New York 12237
(518) 473-7488
(518) 473-2019 (FAX)
REGSQNA@health.ny.gov




                                                 82
                      REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS FOR
                     SMALL BUSINESS AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS



Effects on Small Business and Local Governments:

       Many of the public water systems (PWS) affected by the proposal are owned or operated

by small businesses or local government. The Department does not maintain information on the

number of the PWS owned by small businesses. There are approximately 1,500 PWS owned by

local governments.



       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements (ECMR): Small businesses will be

affected. The cost of analysis is estimated to be between $350 and $700 per sample. The cost per

average PWS, based on 1.7 entry points per system is between $595 and $1,190 per water

system. The cost to local governments will be between $892,500 and $1,785,000. Costs will

likely be absorbed by rate payers, tenants and business owners.



       Notification Levels (NL): The Department estimates a notification cost of $5 per service

connection including labor, fees and postage. Costs will likely be absorbed by rate payers,

tenants and business owners.



       Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCL): Each PWS owned and operated by small

businesses or local governments must comply with the MCLs and will incur the same impacts as

other PWS. Costs will likely be absorbed by rate payers, tenants and business owners.




                                               83
Reporting and Recordkeeping and Other Compliance Requirements:

       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements and Notification Levels: The ECMR

creates a new regulatory program with paperwork, tracking and enforcement. A PWS owned and

operated by small businesses or local governments will incur the same costs as other PWS.



       Maximum Contaminant Levels: The additional paperwork needed is expected to be

minimal because a PWS is required to keep such records for existing MCLs. The paperwork

requirements will increase if MCLs are exceeded and/or treatment is required. A PWS owned

and operated by small businesses or local governments will incur the same costs as other PWS.



Professional Services:

       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements and Maximum Contaminant Levels:

Each PWS will require the services of a laboratory to analyze samples for emerging

contaminants. The laboratory must be approved for USEPA Method 533 by the Department

under its Environmental Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP). Sufficient laboratory capability

and capacity is anticipated to be available. If an MCL is exceeded, a professional will be required

to design changes to the PWS to meet the MCL. A PWS owned and operated by small businesses

or local governments will incur the same costs as other PWS.



       Notification Levels: No professional services are required.




                                                84
Compliance Costs:

       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements: PHL 1112, and thus the ECMR,

applies to CWS and NTNC. The ECMR applies to approximately 3,550 PWS that may be either

privately owned or publicly owned. The cost of the ECMR includes the cost of laboratory

analysis for each PWS as well as the cost to the Department for administering the ECMR

program. Local governments own or operate approximately 1,500 PWS. The remaining 2,050 are

expected to be privately owned and could include small businesses. The Department does not

track how many PWS are owned by small businesses.

       The ECMR will be modeled after the Environmental Protection Agency’s (USEPA) fifth

Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule, 40 CFR 141.40 (UCMR5), to allow samples

collected under UCMR5 to be used to satisfy the requirements of the ECMR. It is estimated that

approximately 3,550 PWS will be required to monitor. All PWS must use USEPA Method 533

to comply with this requirement. The cost of analysis for this method may vary based on the

laboratory selected, and whether a field reagent blank is analyzed in accordance with the

approved method. It is estimated to cost between $350 and $700 per sample. The cost per

average water system, based on 1.7 entry points per system is between $595 and $1,190 per

PWS; total costs will be proportional to the number of entry points.

       The UCMR5 requires each PWS serving more than 10,000 people to monitor at their own

expense. For PWS serving between 3,300 and 10,000 people, statutory amendments required

that USEPA collect monitoring data from all systems serving more than 3,300 people “subject to

the availability of appropriations”. Similarly, USEPA is required under the Safe Drinking Water

Act (SDWA) § 1445(a)(2)(C)(ii) to pay the “reasonable cost of such testing and laboratory

analysis” for all applicable PWS serving 25 to 10,000 people. This means that if appropriations



                                               85
are made, the USEPA will pay the cost of analysis for each PWS that serves between 3,300 and

10,000 people.

       The effective date of this ECMR program has been established to align with the UCMR5

to minimize by allowing a PWS to use the same samples under both programs. For the ECMR,

samples must be collected by a laboratory certified by ELAP. Not all laboratories certified under

UCMR5 are ELAP certified. PWS serving 3,300 people or fewer generally do not participate in

UCMR5 and will be required to pay for their own monitoring under the ECMR.

       The cost of continued compliance will depend on the concentration of compounds

detected during initial monitoring and whether any MCLs are exceeded.



       Notification Levels: PHL § 1112, applies to CWS or NTNC or 3,550 PWS. There are

3,549 PWS that will be required to monitor for emerging contaminants and provide public

notification when levels are confirmed to be at or above the notification level.

       The Department estimates that 0.12% or four PWS that monitor for emerging

contaminants will have results that are equal to or exceed the category 1 notification level of 30

ppt and 2.5% or 87 PWS will have results that are equal to or exceed the notification level of 100

ppt. These PWS may be operated by small business or local government. The Department

estimates a notification cost of $5 per service connection. The cost per water system will vary

significantly depending on the size of the water system and the method of notification selected.



Maximum Contaminant Levels: The costs include monitoring and notification costs for CWS

and NTNC; routine compliance monitoring for PFAS6, and treatment costs for each PWS that

exceeds the MCLs. There are approximately 1,500 PWS owned by local government.



                                                86
         Monitoring and treatment costs is dependent upon the system size, the number of affected

entry points/sources and the concentration of each contaminant. The cost for a single sample is

between $350-$700 per sample using USEPA method 537.1 or 533, including the cost of field

reagent blank.

         It is estimated that 14% of PWS would exceed the PFAS6 MCL of 30 ppt; however,

many of these PWS already exceed the MCL for PFOA and/or PFOS or have an enforcement

deferral for these compounds and are working towards or have achieved corrective action that is

expected to also address these compounds. It is expected that an additional 1.56% will exceed

the MCL of 30 ppt for PFAS6. It is expected that approximately 2.14% of PWS will either

exceed the proposed MCL of 10 ppt for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA or the PFAS6 MCL.

These PWS may be owned by either a small business or local government. The Department does

not track how many PWS are owned or operated by small business.

         The USEPA has developed a cost estimating tool for different PFAS treatment options.

Depending on the treatment option selected and the size of the system, USEPA’s tool provides

estimated annualized costs per system size as shown in Table 1.



                                 Table 1 – Estimate Annualized Costs for Treatment

   Total Annualized Costs                                                        Population     Population   Population
                                               Population         Population
 (Direct, indirect and add-on    Population                                       Served          Served       Served
                                              Served 501 to      Served 3,301
     capital plus annual        Served ≤500                                      10,001 to       50,001 to   100,001 to
                                                  3,300            to 10,000
 operation and maintenance)                                                       50,000          100,000     500,000
 Treatment          Midpoint
 Costs:                          $25,000        $110,900          $412,200       $1,246,400     $2,799,400   $8,947,800
                    Estimate
 Granular
 Activated                                                                                      $2,281,900   $7,255,600
                                $19,800 to     $87,700 to        $335,000 to    $1,016,000 to
 Carbon              Range                                                                          to            to
                                 $30,300        $134,000          $489,500       $1,476,900
                                                                                                $3,316,800   $10,640,000
 Treatment        Midpoint
                                 $19,500        $74,000           $262,400        $869,700      $2,036,400   $7,339,100
 Costs: Ion       Estimate
 Exchange                                                                                       $1,623,400   $5,777,400
                                $15,000 to     $59,100 to        $212,400 to    $692,700 to
                    Range                                                                           to           to
                                 $24,000        $88,900           $312,300      $1,046,600
                                                                                                $2,449,300   $8,900,800
 Treatment        Midpoint                                                          Not            Not          Not
                                 $17,800        $128,500          $449,600
 Costs: Point     Estimate                                                       applicable     applicable   applicable


                                                            87
 of Use
                          $1,700 to   $33,800 to        $223,100 to
 Reverse       Range
                           $33,800     $223,100          $676,000
 Osmosis

       These estimated costs are based on 2020 dollars and incorporate a 3% discounting rate

over approximately 20 years. Given recent supply-chain challenges and inflationary pressures,

actual annualized estimates could be higher than the ranges presented by USEPA.

       Each PWS will likely make rate adjustments to accommodate these additional capital and

operational costs. Municipally owned PWSs may qualify for federal or state loans or grants to

offset some of the capital investment costs. Most privately owned PWS do not qualify for grant

but may receive loans. Municipally owned PWS may need to comply with cross-cutters such as

Davis-Bacon Act of 1931/ NY Prevailing Wage Rates, American Iron and Steel and/or Buy

American Build American Requirements and federal equivalency requirements for

environmental assessment when receiving federal assistance, such as funding from the Drinking

Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF). Small businesses that do not pursue DWSRF funding

may not need to comply with these cross cutters.



Economic and Technological Feasibility:

       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements and Notification Levels: The

proposed requirements are economically and technologically feasible for small businesses and

local governments. Analytical methods exist for accurate sample analysis to detect the list of

emerging contaminants.



       Maximum Contaminant Levels: There are technologically feasible treatment solutions for

all PFAS6 contaminants. Many small and rural PWS are currently pursuing treatment for PFOA

and PFOS. The treatment technologies for PFAS6 are the same as PFOA and PFOS. Treatment

                                                   88
may present a greater challenge to smaller systems that typically have less resources including

financial and technical expertise than larger systems.



Minimizing Adverse Impact:

       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements: The Department is minimizing

adverse impact by aligning monitoring requirements with the UCMR. This reduces the amount

of duplicative sampling. The Department has the authority to provide monitoring assistance to a

PWS, and directly implement the program should funding for both analysis and staffing become

available. This option would decrease the financial burden of sampling on small businesses such

as mobile home parks or daycares.

       Notification Levels: Adverse impacts are expected to be minimal.

       Maximum Contaminant Levels: The Department has included several provisions that

minimize the impacts on regulated parties. Previous testing conducted using an ELAP approved

method and laboratory may satisfy some or all of the initial monitoring requirements; and

sampling frequency will decrease after the first year if the contaminants are not detected at a

PWS.

       New York State offers programs to support PWS with infrastructure investments

including but not limited to treatment and development/connection to alternate sources of water.

Programs include the DWSRF which provides market rate, low to no interest loans and grants

available to many municipally and some privately-owned PWS based on need and financial

hardship. In addition, the New York State Clean Water Infrastructure Act of 2017 invests $2.5

billion in clean and drinking water infrastructure projects and water quality protection across the

State. The New York State Water Infrastructure Improvement Act (WIIA) provides competitive



                                                89
grants to help municipalities fund water quality infrastructure projects. The Infrastructure

Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) passed by Congress and signed by President Biden in 2021

includes funding specifically targeted towards emerging contaminants with a focus on per- and

polyfluoroalkyl substances.



Small Business and Local Government Participation:

       Small business and local governments were not specifically consulted on this proposal.

The Department will send the notice of proposed rulemaking to American Water Works

Association, the New York Rural Water Association and the Association of Towns and

Conference of Mayors. Emerging contaminant monitoring and notification levels are

requirements of PHL § 1112. The NL categories and MCLs set forth in this proposed rule were

recommendations from the Drinking Water Quality Council (DWQC) which met numerous

times in a public forum and were also recorded and publicly available. During each DWQC

meeting, members of the public were allowed to comment, and comments were provided to the

Department outside of the meetings. Based on the information available it is not possible to

determine the number of small businesses that participated during the meetings or provided

comments. All comments provided by the public were made available to the DWQC for their

consideration.




                                                90
                          RURAL AREA FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS

Types and Estimated Rural Areas:

       These regulations apply to rural areas of the state, where approximately 6,400 small

public water supplies (PWS) are located.

       Emerging Contaminants Monitoring Requirements (ECMR): There are more PWS in

rural areas than urban areas, and those PWS are typically smaller. This regulation applies to

community water systems (CWS) which serve at least five service connections used by year-

round residents or regularly serve at least 25 year-round residents as well as nontransient

noncommunity water systems (NTNC) that regularly serve at least 25 of the same people, four

hours or more per day, for four or more days per week, for 26 or more weeks per year. There are

approximately 2,200 CWS and NTNC water systems that serve less than 1,000 persons and

approximately 335 PWS that serve between 1,000 and 3,300 persons. Most of those water

systems are in rural areas. Costs can be mitigated if the Department directly implements the

program and provides monitoring assistance to small water supplies.

       Notification Levels (NL): It is expected that NLs will impact rural areas in the same

manner as the rest of the State.

       Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCL): The cost of monitoring may impact rural areas of

the State more than urban and suburban areas of the state since rural areas were less likely to

detect PFOA and PFOS during 2020 and 2021. These water systems may have expected to be

able to reduce monitoring to once every three years for only PFOA and PFOS. These regulations

require sampling for the full analytical method and will require monitoring for up to four

additional quarters depending on source water type.




                                                91
Reporting, Recordkeeping and Other Compliance Requirements

Reporting and Recordkeeping:

        The obligations imposed on rural area PWS are the same as for all owners or operators of

PWS.



Professional Services:

        ECMR: Each PWS impacted by the amended regulations will require the Environmental

Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP) approved services in accord with USEPA method 533 to

analyze samples for emerging contaminants. Sufficient laboratory capability and capacity is

anticipated to be available. If an MCL is exceeded, a licensed professional will be required to

design changes to the PWS to meet the MCL. A PWS in a rural area will incur the same costs as

other PWS.

        NL: Most rural area PWS will not need professional services to conduct public

notification when a water system confirms the presence of emerging contaminants at or above

the notification level.

        MCL: If an MCL is exceeded, a licensed professional will be required to design changes

to the PWS to meet the MCL.



Compliance Costs:

        ECMR: Pursuant to PHL § 1112 the ECMR applies to each PWS that serves at least five

service connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at least 25 year-round

residents, defined in the SSC as a community water system (CWS); or a PWS that regularly

serves at least 25 of the same people, four hours or more per day, for four or more days per



                                                92
week, for 26 or more weeks per year, defined in the SSC as a nontransient noncommunity water

system (NTNC). The ECMR applies to approximately 3,550 PWS, many of which are located in

rural areas. The cost of the ECMR includes the cost of laboratory analysis for each PWS as well

as the cost to the Department for administering the ECMR program.

       The ECMR will be modeled after the US Environmental Protection Agency’s (USEPA)

fifth Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule, 40 CFR 141.40 (UCMR5), to allow samples

collected under UCMR5 to be used to satisfy the requirements of the ECMR. Consistent with

UCMR5, ECMR will require that one sample set be collected per entry point. It is estimated that

approximately 3,550 PWS will be required to monitor at 5,247 locations. All PWS must use

USEPA Method 533 to comply with this requirement. All PWS must use USEPA Method 533:

Determination of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Drinking Water by Isotope Dilution

Anion Exchange Solid Phase Extraction and Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass

Spectrometry to comply with this requirement. The cost of analysis for this method may vary

based on the laboratory selected, and whether a field reagent blank is analyzed in accordance

with the approved method. It is estimated to cost between $350 and $700 per sample. Estimated

sampling costs are based on estimates prepared by USEPA and surveys of laboratories certified

by the ELAP. This estimate does not include the cost of labor to collect and transport the sample.

The expected cost per average water system, based on 1.7 entry points per system is between

$595 and $1,190; total costs will be proportional to the number of entry points. Table 1 provides

a range of sampling costs based on the estimated number of samples that will be required.

             Table 1: Impacts on the regulated community – Emerging Contaminants
                                    Monitoring Requirements
        System Type           Number of        Estimated    Low cost per   High cost per
                             water systems     number of   sample ($350)   sample ($700)
                                                samples
 Community Water Systems     2,837           4,797         1,678,950       3,357,900
 Nontransient noncommunity   713             1,084         379,400         758,800


                                                93
 Total                                                      $2,058,350      $4,116,700



         The UCMR5 requires each PWS serving more than 10,000 people to monitor at their own

expense. For PWS serving between 3,300 and 10,000 people, amendments to the American

Water Infrastructure Act (AWIA) Section 2021(a) required that USEPA collect monitoring data

from all systems serving more than 3,300 people “subject to the availability of appropriations”.

For PWS serving between 3,300 and 10,000 people, amendments to the American Water

Infrastructure Act (AWIA) Section 2021(a) required that USEPA collect monitoring data from

all systems serving more than 3,300 people “subject to the availability of appropriations.”

Similarly, USEPA is required under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) Section

1445(a)(2)(C)(ii) to pay the “reasonable cost of such testing and laboratory analysis” for all

applicable PWS serving 25 to 10,000 people. This means that if appropriations are made, the

USEPA will pay the cost of analysis for each PWS that serves between 3,300 and 10,000 people

as well as a small national subset of PWS serving 25 to 3,300 people.

         The ECMR program effective date aligns with the UCMR5 to ensure that costs are

minimized by allowing a PWS to use the same samples under both programs. For the ECMR,

samples must be collected by a laboratory certified by the Department’s Environmental

Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP). Not all laboratories certified under UCMR5 are ELAP-

certified. There are no similar programs available currently for each PWS that serves 3,300

people or fewer. These water systems generally do not participate in UCMR5 and will be

required to pay for their own monitoring under the ECMR. Many of the PWS that serve 3,300

people or fewer are in rural areas, and most PWS that serve less than 1,000 people are in rural

areas.




                                                94
        The cost of continued compliance will depend on many factors, including the

concentration of compounds detected during initial monitoring and whether any MCLs are

exceeded. The cost per sample is expected to be the same for continued compliance as it is for

initial monitoring.

        NL: The Department estimates that 0.12% of PWS that monitor for emerging

contaminants will have monitoring results that are equal to or exceed the category 1 notification

level of 30 ppt and 2.5% will have monitoring results that are equal to or exceed the notification

level of 100 ppt. The Department estimates an average cost of $5 per service connection to send

out proper notifications, which includes labor, fees and postage; however, larger systems may

pay a much lower per unit cost for notification. Similarly, a water system that can hand deliver

notices may pay a lower per unit cost. The cost per water system will vary significantly

depending on the size of the water system and the method of notification selected. Table 9

demonstrates the expected number of PWS that will exceed both the category 1 and category 2

notification levels.



        MCL: The costs to PWS in rural areas include monitoring and notification costs for CWS

and NTNC; routine compliance monitoring for PFAS6, and treatment costs for each PWS that

exceeds the MCLs.

        Monitoring and treatment costs for each rural PWS is dependent upon the system size,

number of affected entry points/sources and the concentration of each contaminant. The cost for

a single sample for emerging contaminants is between $350-$700 per sample using USEPA

method 537.1 or 533, including the cost of field reagent blank. The cost of a single sample for




                                                95
emerging contaminants is between $350-$700 using USEPA method 537.1 or 533, including the

cost of field reagent blank.

         It is estimated that 14% of water systems would exceed the PFAS6 MCL of 30 ppt;

however, many of these PWS already exceed the MCL for PFOA and/or PFOS or have an

enforcement deferral for these compounds and are working towards or have achieved corrective

action that is expected to also address these compounds. It is expected that an additional 1.56%

of PWS will exceed the MCL of 30 ppt for PFAS6. It is expected that approximately 2.14% of

PWS will either exceed the proposed MCL of 10 ppt for PFHxS, PFHpA, PFNA and PFDA or

the PFAS6 MCL.

         The USEPA has developed a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) cost estimating tool for

different PFAS treatment options. Depending on the treatment option selected and the size of the

system, USEPA’s WBS tool provides estimated annualized costs per system size as shown in

Table 2.



                                 Table 2 – Estimate Annualized Costs for Treatment

   Total Annualized Costs                                                        Population     Population   Population
                                               Population         Population
 (Direct, indirect and add-on    Population                                       Served          Served       Served
                                              Served 501 to      Served 3,301
     capital plus annual        Served ≤500                                      10,001 to       50,001 to   100,001 to
                                                  3,300            to 10,000
 operation and maintenance)                                                       50,000          100,000     500,000
 Treatment          Midpoint
 Costs:                          $25,000        $110,900          $412,200       $1,246,400     $2,799,400   $8,947,800
                    Estimate
 Granular
 Activated                                                                                      $2,281,900   $7,255,600
                                $19,800 to     $87,700 to        $335,000 to    $1,016,000 to
 Carbon              Range                                                                          to            to
                                 $30,300        $134,000          $489,500       $1,476,900
                                                                                                $3,316,800   $10,640,000
 Treatment        Midpoint
                                 $19,500        $74,000           $262,400        $869,700      $2,036,400   $7,339,100
 Costs: Ion       Estimate
 Exchange                                                                                       $1,623,400   $5,777,400
                                $15,000 to     $59,100 to        $212,400 to    $692,700 to
                    Range                                                                           to           to
                                 $24,000        $88,900           $312,300      $1,046,600
                                                                                                $2,449,300   $8,900,800
 Treatment        Midpoint
                                 $17,800        $128,500          $449,600
 Costs: Point     Estimate
                                                                                    Not            Not           Not
 of Use
                                 $1,700 to     $33,800 to        $223,100 to     applicable     applicable    applicable
 Reverse            Range
                                  $33,800       $223,100          $676,000
 Osmosis




                                                            96
         These estimated costs are based on 2020 dollars and incorporate a 3% discounting rate

over approximately 20 years. Given recent supply-chain challenges and higher inflationary

pressures, actual annualized estimates could be higher than the ranges presented by USEPA.

         Each PWS will likely make rate or rent adjustments to accommodate these additional

capital and operational costs. Municipally owned PWSs may qualify for federal or state loans or

grants to offset some of the capital investment for treatment system components or upgrades.

Most privately owned water systems do not qualify for grant but are able to take advantage of

loans.



Economic and Technological Feasibility

         ECMR: The ECMR is economically and technologically feasible for rural area PWS.

Analytical methods exist for accurate sample analysis to detect emerging contaminants.



         NL: The NLs are economically and technologically feasible for rural area PWS. The cost

of notices is estimated to be $5 per service connection. This should be feasible for any water

system that detects emerging contaminants at or above the notification level.



         MCL: Many small and rural water systems are currently pursuing treatment for PFOA

and PFOS using treatment technologies that can also abate PFAS6. Treatment may present a

greater challenge to smaller systems that typically have less resources than larger systems.




                                                97
Rural Area Participation:

The Department made presentations outlining the requirements of Public Health Law to rural

operators at the New York Rural Water Association conference on May 24, 2022; the

Southeastern NY Water Works Conference on June 9, 2022 and the American Water Works

Association New York Conference on April 13, 2022. The proposal was discussed during the

Drinking Water Quality Council meeting on May 2, 2022. This meeting was open to the public,

was broadcast live on the internet, and is available on the Department’s website.




                                               98
                                  JOB IMPACT STATEMENT

Nature of the Impact:

The Department expects there to be a positive impact on jobs and employment opportunities. A

subset of public water system (PWS) owners will hire engineering/architectural firms or

individuals to assist with regulatory compliance. Each PWS impacted by this amendment will

require the professional services of a certified or approved laboratory to perform the analyses for

PFAS6 and emerging contaminants, which may create a need for additional laboratory capability

and capacity. A PWS that confirms levels of emerging contaminants at or above the notification

level may need copy or printing services. Additionally, a subset of owners will require the

services of a licensed professional engineer to design facilities to meet the MCLs through

treatment, or to access an alternate source.



Categories and Numbers Affected:

The Department anticipates no negative impact on jobs or employment opportunities as a result

of the proposed regulations.



Regions of Adverse Impact:

The Department anticipates no negative impact on jobs or employment opportunities as a result

of the proposed regulations.



Minimizing Adverse Impact:

Not applicable.




                                                99
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Public Health and Health Planning Council and the

Commissioner of Health by section 225 of the Public Health Law, Subpart 5-1 of Title 10

(Health) of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York

is amended, to be effective upon publication of a Notice of Adoption in the New York State

Register, to read as follows:




Subparagraph 5-1.43(c)(2)(i) is amended to read as follows:

(i) Any water system that maintains the range of State-specified values for the water quality

parameters reflecting optimal corrosion control treatment during three consecutive years of

monitoring in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subdivision may reduce the frequency with

which it collects the number of distribution system samples for applicable water quality

parameters specified in paragraph (1) of this subdivision from every six months to annually. This

sampling shall begin during the calendar year immediately following the end of the monitoring

period in which the third consecutive year of six-month monitoring occurs. Any water system

that maintains the range of State-specified values for the water quality parameters reflecting

optimal corrosion control treatment during three consecutive years of annual monitoring under

this paragraph may reduce the frequency with which it collects the number of distribution system

samples for applicable water quality parameters specified in paragraph (1) of this subdivision

from annually to every three years. This sampling begins no later than the third calendar year

following the end of the monitoring period in which the third consecutive year of monitoring

occurs.
Subparagraph 5-1.47(b)(2)(ii)(b)(1) is amended to read as follows:

(1) contact the State for [information regarding] a list of community based organizations serving

target populations, even if they are not located within the water system’s service area, and

deliver education materials to all appropriate organizations along with an informational notice

that encourages distribution to all the organization’s potentially affected customers or

community water system’s users as determined in consultation with the State[;]. The water

system must contact the State directly by phone or in person;




                                                 2
Repeal Table 6 of section 5-1.52 and replace with a new Table 6 to read as follows:

Table 6. Microbiological Contaminants Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL)/Treatment Technique Trigger (TTT)/
Treatment Technique Violation (TTV) Determination1
 Contaminant/         Sample         MCL      Performance Standard        Determination of MCL/TTV and TTT10
 Trigger/Violation    Location       or TTT
                                     or TTV
 Total coliform2      Distribution   TTT3     No positive sample4,5       A Level 1 TTT occurs at systems collecting 40 or more
                      Sample                                              samples per month when more than 5.0 percent of the samples
                      Sites                                               are total coliform positive.11
                                     TTT3                                 A Level 1 TTT occurs at systems collecting less than 40
                                                                          samples per month when two or more samples are total
                                                                          coliform positive.11
                                     TTT3                                 A Level 1 TTT occurs at any system that fails to collect every
                                                                          required repeat sample after any single total coliform positive
                                                                          sample.11
                                     TTT6                                 A Level 2 TTT occurs at any system that has a second Level 1
                                                                          trigger within a rolling 12-month period, unless the State has
                                                                          determined a likely reason that the samples that caused the first
                                                                          Level 1 TTT were total coliform positive and has established
                                                                          that the system has corrected the problem.11
 Escherichia coli                    MCL/     No positive sample5,7       An MCL violation and Level 2 TTT occurs when a total
 (E. Coli)                           TTT4,6                               coliform sample is positive for E. coli and a repeat total
                                                                          coliform sample is positive.13
                                     MCL/     No positive sample5,7       An MCL violation and Level 2 TTT occurs when a total
                                     TTT4,6                               coliform sample is positive for total coliform but negative for
                                                                          E. coli and a repeat total coliform sample is positive for E.
                                                                          coli.13
                                     MCL/                                 An MCL violation and Level 2 TTT occurs when a total
                                     TTT4,6                               coliform sample is positive for total coliform but negative for
                                                                          E. coli and a repeat total coliform positive sample is not
                                                                          analyzed for E. coli.13


                                                                  3
                                          MCL/                                          An MCL violation occurs when a system fails to collect every
                                          TTT4,6                                        required repeat sample after any E. coli positive routine
                                                                                        sample.

Fecal indicator:         Untreated        TTV          No fecal indicator in            A TTV occurs when a raw water sample is positive for the
E. coli, and/or          Water from                    samples collected from           fecal indicator contaminant and system does not provide and
enterococci, and/or      a Ground                      raw source water from a          document, through process compliance monitoring, 4-log virus
coliphage8               Water                         ground water source.9,10         treatment during peak flow at first customer. If repeat sampling
                         Source                                                         of the raw water is directed by the State and all additional
                                                                                        samples are negative for fecal indicator, there is no TTV.9,13
Other trigger or                          TTV4                                          A TTV occurs when a system exceeds a TTT and then fails to
violation                                                                               conduct the required assessment or corrective actions.12
                                          TTV4                                          A TTV occurs when a seasonal system fails to complete a
                                                                                        State-approved start-up procedure prior to serving water to the
                                                                                        public.14
1     All samples collected in accordance with Table 11 footnotes 1 and 2 and Table 11B of this section and samples collected in accordance with subdivision 5-
      1.51(g) of this Subpart shall be included in determining compliance with the MCL, TTT, and/or TTV unless any of the samples have been invalidated by
      the State. In accordance with 40 CFR 141.852(a)(2) systems need only determine the presence or absence of total coliforms and E. coli; a determination of
      density is not required.
2     Total coliform method additions or modifications to approved methods
For total coliform (TC) samples collected from untreated surface water or GWUDI sources, the time from sample collection to initiation of analysis may not
exceed 8 hours and the samples must be held below 10 degrees C during transit to the laboratory. For other TC samples, the time from collection to initiation of
analysis may not exceed 30 hours. Systems are encouraged, but not required, to hold TC samples below 10 degrees C during transit.
     • If the Total Coliform Fermentation Technique using standard methods 9221A or B is used, and if inverted tubes are used to detect gas production, the
          media should cover these tubes at least one half to two-thirds after the sample is added. Also, no requirement exists to run the completed phase on 10
          percent of all TC-positive confirmed tubes. Additionally, lactose broth, as commercially available, may be used in lieu of lauryl tryptose broth, if the
          system conducts at least 25 parallel tests between this medium and lauryl tryptose broth using the water normally tested, and this comparison
          demonstrates that the false-positive rate and false-negative rate for TC, using lactose broth, is less than 10 percent.
    • If Membrane Filter Technique Standard Methods 9222A, B, and optionally C are used, MI agar also may be used. Verification of colonies is not
          required.
    • If the Standard Methods Presence-Absence (P-A) Coliform Test, 9221D is used, six-times formulation strength may be used if the medium is filter-
          sterilized rather than autoclaved.
    • If the Total Coliform Membrane Filter Technique, Standard Methods 9222 A, B, C is used, MI agar also may be used. Verification of colonies is not
          required.
     • For any TC testing it is strongly recommended that laboratories evaluate the false-positive and negative rates for the method(s) they use for monitoring
          TC. Laboratories are also encouraged to establish false-positive and false-negative rates within their own laboratory and sample matrix (drinking water
          or source water) with the intent that if the method they choose has an unacceptable false-positive or negative rate, another method can be used. It is


                                                                               4
         suggested that laboratories perform these studies on a minimum of 5% of all TC-positive samples, except for those methods where verification/
         confirmation is already required. Methods for establishing false-positive and negative-rates may be based on lactose fermentation, the rapid test for β-
         galactosidase and cytochrome oxidase, multi-test identification systems, or equivalent confirmation tests. False-positive and false-negative information
         is often available in published studies and/or from the manufacturer(s).
3    The system must complete a Level 1 assessment as soon as practical after exceeding a Level 1 TTT. The system must submit the completed Level 1
     assessment form to the State within 30 days after the system learns that it has exceeded a trigger. Corrective actions shall be addressed in accordance with
     section 5-1.71(e) of this Subpart.
4    See Table 13 for public notification requirements
5    If any total coliform or E. Coli sample is positive, repeat samples must be collected in accordance with Table 11B of this section.
6    A Level 2 assessment must be completed within 30 days after the system learns that it has exceeded a trigger. Corrective actions shall be addressed in
     accordance with section 5-1.71(e) of this Subpart.
7    For notification purposes, an E. coli MCL violation in the distribution system is a public health hazard requiring Tier 1 notification. At a ground water
     system, Tier 1 notification is required after initial detection of E. coli or other fecal indicator in raw source water, if the system does not provide 4-log virus
     treatment and process compliance monitoring, even if not confirmed with additional sampling
8    For any fecal indicator sample collected as described in section 5-1.52, Table 6, the time from sample collection to initiation of analysis may not exceed 30
     hours. The system is encouraged but is not required to hold samples below 10 °C during transit.
9    If raw water source sample is fecal indicator positive, the water system, in consultation with the State, may collect an additional 5 samples within 24 hours
     at each source that tested fecal indicator positive. If none of the additional samples are fecal indicator positive, then there is no TTV. Note that Tier 1
     notification must be made after the initial raw water fecal indicator positive sample, even if it is not confirmed with additional sampling.
10   Failure to take every required routine or additional routine sample in a compliance period is a monitoring violation.
11   Failure to analyze for E. coli following a total coliform positive routine sample is a monitoring violation.
12   Failure to submit a monitoring report or completed assessment form after a system properly conducts monitoring or assessment in a timely manner is a
     reporting violation.
13   Failure to notify the State following an E. coli-positive sample as required by 5-1.52 Table 13 and 5-1.77(a) of this Subpart in a timely manner is a
     reporting violation.
14   Failure to submit certification of completion of State approved start-up procedure by a seasonal system is a reporting violation.




                                                                                 5
Footnote 4 of section 5-1.52 Table 11A is amended to read as follows:

4
    Samples must be taken and analyzed every day the system serves water to the public and the turbidity of the raw

water exceeds [1.49]1 NTU. The samples count toward the weekly sampling requirement.




Section 5-1.80 is amended to read as follows:

The provisions of this section, and sections 5-1.81 through 5-1.83 of this Subpart apply to all

public water systems, as defined in paragraph 5-1.1(cb) of this Subpart, supplied by a surface

water source(s) or ground water source(s) directly influenced by surface water, provided the

system serves 15 or more service connections or serves 25 or more persons. The requirements in

this section for filtered systems apply to any system with a surface water or GWUDI source that

is required to provide filtration, regardless of whether the system is currently operating a

filtration system. All treatment must comply with the requirements of the Microbial Toolbox

Components as described in 40 CFR 141.715 through 40 CFR 141.720. Any unfiltered systems

that are in compliance with the filtration avoidance criteria in section 5-1.30(c) of this Subpart,

are subject to the requirements in sections 5-1.80 through 5-1.83 of this Subpart pertaining to

unfiltered systems. Wholesale system compliance with sections 5-1.81 through 5-1.83 of this

Subpart is based on the population of the largest system in the combined distribution system. The

above systems shall comply with the following requirements:




                                                           6
Subparagraph 5-1.81(a)(1)(iii)(c) is repealed and replaced with the following:

(c) shall sample their source water for Cryptosporidium at least twice per month for 12 months,

or at least monthly for 24 months, if, based on monitoring conducted under this subparagraph,

they meet one of the following criteria:

(1) For systems using lake/reservoir sources, the annual mean E. coli concentration is greater

than 10 E. coli/100 mL;

(2) For systems using flowing stream sources, the annual mean E. coli concentration is greater

than 50 E. coli/100 mL; or

(3) The system does not conduct E. Coli monitoring once every two weeks for 12 months.

(4) Systems using ground water under the direct influence of surface water (GWUDI) must

comply with the requirements of subclause (1) through (3) of this clause based on the E. coli

level that applies to the nearest surface water body. If no surface water body is nearby, the

system must comply based on the requirements that apply to systems using lake/reservoir

sources.

(5) the State may approve an alternative to the E. coli concentration specified in subclause (1)

and subclause (2) of this clause to trigger Cryptosporidium monitoring. This approval by the

State will be provided to the system in writing and will include the basis for the State’s

determination that the alternative trigger concentration will provide a more accurate

identification of whether a system will exceed the Bin 1 Cryptosporidium level specified in

section 5-1.83(a)(2) of this Subpart.




                                                 7
Subdivision 5-1.92(a) is amended to read as follows:

(a) The supplier of water may request, and the department may grant, one or more exemptions

from any treatment technique requirement, except for filtration and disinfection of a surface

water source in accordance with 5-1.30(b), (c) and (g) of this Subpart, and/or any MCL, except

for Escherichia coli (E. coli). Exemptions may be granted to any public water system based on a

finding that:

                                         *      *       *

(4) The supplier of water has not been granted a variance under section 5-1.90 of this Subpart.




                                                8
                        NOTICE OF CONSENSUS RULEMAKING




Statutory Authority:

The Public Health and Health Planning Council, subject to the approval of the Commissioner of

Health, is authorized by section 225 of the Public Health Law to establish, and from time to time,

amend and repeal sanitary regulations, known as the sanitary code of the State of New York.




Basis:

The proposed regulatory amendments are non-substantive and non-controversial. The

amendment of 10 NYCRR Subpart 5-1 "Public Water Systems" of the State Sanitary code will

correct typographic errors, update references and make minor technical revisions to conform the

regulation with federal requirements to obtain primacy for the implementation and enforcement

of federal drinking water regulations from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.




                                                9
                                JOB IMPACT STATEMENT

The Department of Health has determined that the proposed revisions will not have substantial

adverse impact on jobs or employment opportunities. These correct mainly typographic errors

and do not change the requirements water systems need to follow to implement the regulation.




                                              10
                                                      Public Health and Health
                                                         Planning Council
                                Project # 221248-C
                          NYU Langone Hospital-Long Island

  Program:         Hospital                                       County:       Nassau
  Purpose:         Construction                                   Acknowledged: July 26, 2022


                                            Executive Summary

Description                                                  Program Summary
NYU Langone Hospital- Long Island (NYULH-LI)                 Based on the results of this review, a favorable
requests approval to certify an extension clinic to          recommendation can be made regarding the
provide single specialty (gastroenterology)                  f acility’s current compliance pursuant to 2802-(3)(e)
ambulatory surgery services on the 7th floor of 211          of the New York State Public Health Law.
Station Drive, Mineola. The project will allow
NYULH-LI to address capacity issues at the main              Financial Summary
hospital.                                                    The total project cost of $18,219,372 will be met
                                                             through equity from hospital operations. The budget
The hospital also has approval for an extension              projects Year One net income of $3,304,223 and
clinic on the 6th f loor of the building to provide          $4,511,830 by Year Three.
wound care services, which is currently under
construction.                                                  Budget              Year One         Year Three
                                                                                    (2023)            (2025)
OPCHSM Recommendation                                          Revenues           $11,977,013       $13,769,697
Contingent Approval is recommended.                            Expenses             8,672,790         9,257,867
                                                               Net Income          $3,304,223        $4,511,830
Need Summary
Currently, patients needing outpatient endoscopies
at NYU Langone Hospital-Long Island have a
three-month wait time. The applicant projects 3,373
visits in the first year and 3,655 in the third with
Medicaid utilization of 16.4%.




                                             Project #221248-C Exhibit Page 1
                                     Recommendations


Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New York
   State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all construction
   applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council shall pay an additional
   f ee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of the project, exclusive of CON
   f ees. [PMU]
2. The submission of Design Development and State Hospital Code (SHC) Drawings, as described in
   BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0 Required Schematic Design (SD) and Design
   Development (DD) Drawings, and 3.20 LSC Chapter 20, New Ambulatory Healthcare Public Use, for
   review and approval. [DAS]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by June 1, 2024, including all pre-opening processes, if applicable.
   Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the project by the
   applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior
   approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before June 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by March 1,
   2024, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies have been satisfied
   prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any
   changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10 NYCRR Section 710.10(a), if
   construction is not started on or before the approved start date this shall constitute abandonment of
   the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing Submission
   Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction. [AER]

Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                    Project #221248-C Exhibit Page 2
                               Need and Program Analysis
Proposal
NYU Langone Hospital-Long Island is seeking approval to certify an extension clinic to provide single
specialty (gastroenterology) ambulatory surgery services on the 7th floor of 211 Station Drive, Mineola,
NY 11501, in Nassau County.

Analysis
Currently, inpatients and outpatients receive their care in the same endoscopy suite which is located
within the adjacent hospital. The wait for outpatient endoscopy procedures has been up to three months.
This project will relieve pressure on the in-hospital endoscopy rooms by performing surgeries that meet
appropriate criteria for the proposed extension clinic. The current hospital endoscopy suite has six
procedure rooms. This extension clinic will have four procedure rooms for immediate use and two shelled
procedure rooms for future growth. Approval of this project will allow more timely appointments leading to
improved outcomes and patient satisfaction.

The primary service area is Nassau County, the secondary service area includes Suffolk and Queens
Counties. According to Data USA, in 2019, 95.7% of the population in Nassau County has health
coverage as follows.

 Employer Plans              58.9%
 Medicaid                    10.4%
 Medicare                    13.7%
 Non-Group Plans             12.4%
 Military or VA              0.19%

The applicant projects 3,373 visits in the first year and 3,655 in the third with Medicaid utilization of
16.4%. Staffing is expected to increase by 32.2 FTEs as a result of this project.

The table below shows the number of patient visits at relevant ambulatory surgery centers in Nassau
County f or the years 2019 through 2021.

 Facility Name                       Specialty                     Patient Visits
                                                             2019      2020       2021
 Day OP of North Nassau 3            Multi                      860        619         0
 East Hills Surgery Center           Multi                    3,001     3,964      4,886
 Endoscopy Center of LI              Gastroenterology         8,547     6,874      8,696
 Garden City Surgi Center            Multi                    7,109     5,628      7,066
 LI Center f or Digestive Health     Gastroenterology         6,508     4,267      5,605
 Lynbrook Surgery Center 2           Multi                    7,325     5,647      4,736
 Meadowbrook Endoscopy               Gastroenterology        10,088     7,850      9,553
 New Hyde Park Endoscopy             Gastroenterology         4,900     4,859      6,350
 Pro Health ASC, Inc 3               Multi                   11,203    11,031          0
 ProHealth Day Op ASC 1,3            Multi                    5,377        985         0
 Star Surgical Suites                Gastroenterology           N/A       N/A        807
 (opened 10/20/20)
 Syosset SurgiCenter                 Multi                      709        3,886       4,993
 (opened 1/15/19)
 Totals                                                      65,627       55,610      52,692
1 2020 SPARCS
              data is for a partial year
2 2021 SPARCS data is for a partial year
3 No SPARCS data found for 2021




                                       Project #221248-C Exhibit Page 3
Compliance with Applicable Codes, Rules, and Regulations
The medical staff will continue to ensure that the procedures performed at the facility conform to generally
accepted standards of practice and that privileges granted are within the physician’s scope of practice
and expertise. The Facility's admissions policy includes anti-discrimination provisions regarding age, race,
creed, color, national origin, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, religion, disability, or source of
payment. All procedures are performed in accordance with all applicable federal and state codes, rules,
and regulations.

Conclusion
Approval of this project will result in improved care times and increased patient satisfaction for residents
of Nassau, Queens, and Suffolk Counties needing gastroenterology surgery services through NYU
Langone Hospital-LI. Based on the results of this review, a favorable recommendation can be made
regarding the facility’s current compliance pursuant to 2802-(3)(e) of the New York State Public Health
Law.



                                      Financial Analysis
Lease Rental Agreement
The applicant has submitted an executed lease rental agreement for the site that they are currently
occupying, which is summarized below. The f ollowing lease includes space in the lobby and space on the
f if th through the seventh floor.

 Premises         81,500 square f eet located at 211 Station Road, Mineola, New York. The lessee shall
                  lease 2,000 square feet on the lobby,26,500 square feet on the fifth floor, 26,500
                  square f eet on the sixth, and 26,500 square feet on the seventh floor.
 Lessor           Steel Station RD, LLC
 Lessee           NYU Langone Hospitals
 Term             30-year term with two (2) options to extend the term of the lease for five years each.
 Rental           $1,915,250. For the seventh floor alone, this comes to $622,750.
 Provisions       The lessee shall be responsible for real estate taxes, maintenance, and utilities.
The applicant provided an affidavit indicating that there is no relationship between the lessor and the
lessee.

Total Project Cost and Financing
The total project cost, which is for renovations and the acquisition of moveable equipment, is estimated at
$18,219,372 and will be financed from equity from operations.

 Renovation and Demolition                       $8,040,000
 Design Contingency                                  88,259
 Construction Contingency                           804,000
 Planning Consultant Fees                            40,212
 Architect/Engineering Fees                         588,396
 Construction Manager Fees                        2,721,863
 Moveable Equipment                               3,996,127
 Telecommunications                               1,838,868
 CON Fee                                              2,000
 Additional Processing Fee                           99,647
 Total Project Cost                             $18,219,372




                                     Project #221248-C Exhibit Page 4
Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted an operating budget, in 2022 dollars, for the first and third years of the
extension clinic, summarized below:

                                            Year One                        Year Three
                                             (2023)                           (2025)
                                Per Visit              Total        Per Visit        Total
 Revenues
 Commercial MC                       $2,088          $446,751          $2,214           $513,619
 Commercial FFS                      $6,036        $8,994,274          $6,403        $10,340,512
 Medicare FFS                        $1,645        $1,232,036          $1,747         $1,416,443
 Medicare MC                         $1,661          $594,636          $1,762           $683,639
 Medicaid FFS                          $950           $12,350          $1,014            $14,198
 Medicaid MC                         $1,178          $634,931          $1,248           $729,966
 Private Pay                           $860            $4,299            $988             $4,942
 Other                               $9,623           $57,736         $11,063            $66,378
 Total Revenues                                   $11,977,013                        $13,769,697

 Expenses
 Operating                        $2,386.61         $8,050,040      $2,362.55         $8,635,117
 Capital                            $184.63            622,750         170.38            622,750
 Total Expenses                   $2,571.24         $8,672,790      $2,532.93         $9,257,867

 Net Income                                         $3,304,223                        $4,511,830

 Utilization (Visits)                                      3,373                            3,655
 Cost Per Visit                                           $2,571                           $2,533

Utilization broken down by payor source during the first and third years is as follows:

                          Year One            Year Three
 Payor                     (2023)               (2025)
 Commercial FFS                 6.34%               6.35%
 Commercial MC                44.14%               44.19%
 Medicare FFS                 22.21%               22.16%
 Medicare MC                  10.61%               10.62%
 Medicaid FFS                   0.39%               0.38%
 Medicaid MC                  15.98%               16.01%
 Private Pay                    0.15%               0.14%
 Other                          0.18%               0.16%
 Total                       100.00%              100.00%

Capability and Feasibility
Total project costs of $18,219,372 will be met with equity. BFA Attachment A is the August 31, 2020, and
August 31, 2021, certified financial statements of NYU Langone Hospital, which indicate the availability of
suf ficient funds for the equity contribution.

The submitted budget indicates an excess of revenues over expenses of $3,304,223 and $4,511,830
during the f irst and third years, respectively. Revenues are based on current reimbursement
methodologies for endoscopy services. The submitted budget appears reasonable.




                                     Project #221248-C Exhibit Page 5
As shown in BFA Attachment A, the entity had an average positive working capital position and an
average positive net asset position for the years ending August 31, 2020, and August 31, 2021. The
entity achieved an average excess of revenues over expenses of $549,800,000 for the years ending
August 31, 2020, and August 31, 2021.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                         Attachments
 BFA Attachment A     Financial Summary- August 31, 2020, and August 31, 2021, certified financial
                      statements of NYU Langone Hospital.




                                    Project #221248-C Exhibit Page 6
                                              Public Health and Health
                                                 Planning Council
                       Project # 221191-B
         Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC

Program:      Diagnostic and Treatment Center               County:       Suffolk
Purpose:      Establishment and Construction                Acknowledged: July 7, 2022


                                      Executive Summary

  Description                                             OPCHSM Recommendation
  Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC, a         Contingent approval with an expiration of the
  New York limited liability company, is requesting       operating certificate five years from the date of
  approval to establish and construct an Article 28       its issuance.
  diagnostic and treatment center (D&TC) to be
  certif ied as a single-specialty freestanding           Need Summary
  ambulatory surgery center (FASC) for oral and           The center will provide oral and maxillofacial
  maxillofacial surgical procedures. Currently, the       surgery services in three procedure rooms. The
  f acility is named Oral Maxillofacial S.C., LLC,        number of projected procedures is 1,100 in Year
  which was f ormed to plan the development of            One and 1,553 in Year Three with Medicaid at
  the surgery center. Upon approval of this               5.00% and Charity Care at 2.00%.
  application, the LLC will amend its Articles of
  Organization to change its name to Maxillofacial        Program Summary
  Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC. The f acility will      The individual background review indicates the
  be located in leased space at 400 Townline
                                                          proposed members have met the standard for
  Road, Hauppauge (Suffolk County).
                                                          approval as set forth in Public Health Law
                                                          §2801-a(3)(b).
                 Proposed Operator
   Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC
                                                          Financial Summary
   Members                             %
   Lynn Pierri, DDS, MS               95%                 The total project costs of $3,719,676 will be
   Thomas DeNapoli                     5%                 f unded via members’ equity.

  Lynn Pierri DeNapoli uses her maiden name                  Budget          Year One        Year Three
  prof essionally. Dr. Pierri is Board Certified in                            (2024)          (2026)
  Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery and will be the             Revenues        $2,199,235       $3,494,455
  Center’s Medical Director. The applicant expects           Expenses         1,836,972        2,561,297
  to enter into a Transfer Agreement for backup              Gain              $362,263         $933,158
  and emergency services with St. Catherine of
  Siena Hospital, located 4.4 miles and 11
  minutes travel time from the proposed Center.

  All procedures projected are currently being
  perf ormed in Lynn Pierri, DDS, MS office-based
  surgery practice.




                                       Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 1
                                     Recommendations

Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval with an expiration of the operating certificate five years from the date of its issuance,
contingent upon:
1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New York
    State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all construction
    applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council shall pay an additional
    f ee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of the project, exclusive of CON
    f ees. [PMU]
2. The submission of State Hospital Code (SHC) Drawings for review and approval, as described in
    BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
3. The submission of Engineering (MEP) Drawings for review and approval, as described in BAER
    Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
4. Submission of an executed lease agreement, acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
5. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
6. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
8. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department. [HSP]
9. Submission by the governing body of the ambulatory surgery center of an Organizational Mission
    Statement which identifies, at a minimum, the populations and communities to be served by the
    center, including underserved populations (such as racial and ethnic minorities, women, and
    handicapped persons) and the center’s commitment to meet the health care needs of the community,
    including the provision of services to those in need regardless of ability to pay. The statement shall
    also include commitment to the development of policies and procedures to assure that charity care is
    available to those who cannot afford to pay. [RNR]
10. Submission of a signed agreement with an outside, independent entity satisfactory to the Department
    to provide annual reports to DOH. Reports are due no later than April 1st for the prior year and are to
    be based upon the calendar year. Submission of annual reports will begin after the first full or, if
    greater or equal to six months after the date of certification, partial year of operation. Reports should
    include: a. Data displaying actual utilization including procedures; b. Data displaying the breakdown
    of visits by payor source; c. Data displaying the number of patients who needed follow-up care in a
    hospital within seven days after ambulatory surgery; d. Data displaying the number of emergency
    transf ers to a hospital; e. Data displaying the percentage of charity care provided; f. The number of
    nosocomial infections recorded during the year reported; g. A list of all efforts made to secure charity
    cases; and h. A description of the progress of contract negotiations with Medicaid managed care
    plans. [RNR]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by April 1, 2024, including all pre-opening processes, if applicable.
   Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the project by the
   applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior
   approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before July 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by January
   1, 2024, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies have been satisfied
   prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any
   changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10 NYCRR Section 710.10(a), if
   construction is not started on or before the approved start date this shall constitute abandonment of
   the approval. [PMU]

                                     Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 2
3. The submission of annual reports to the Department as prescribed by the related contingency, each
   year, f or the duration of the limited life approval of the facility. [RNR]
4. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing Submission
   Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction. [AER]
5. The staf f of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the signage must
   clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the clinical space must be used
   exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not disrupt any other entity’s clinical
   program space. [HSP]
6. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s Health
   Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which facilities must
   communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt of the Operating
   Certif icate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the facility’s operations shall
   submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the process to enroll for HCS access for
   the f irst time or update enrollment information as necessary:
   https:www.health.ny.gov/facilites/hospitals/docs/hcs_access_forms_new_clinics. pdf. Questions may
   be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers at 518-402-1004 or email:
   hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP]


Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                     Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 3
                                            Need Analysis
The service area consists of Suffolk County. The population of Suffolk County in 2020 was 1,525,920 and
is projected to decline slightly to 1,494,816 by 2025.

The table below shows the number of patient visits for relevant ambulatory surgery centers in Suffolk
County f or 2019 through 2021. 2020 visits were significantly impacted by COVID-19.
                                                                                Patient Visits
 Spec Type                         Facility Name
                                                                          2019       2020        2021
 Multi          Long Island Ambulatory Surgery Center                     14,642      9,270      12,053
 Multi          Melville Surgery Center                                    5,917      4,611        4,273
 Multi          North Shore Surgi-Center                                   7,226      6,364        6,215
 Multi          Port Jefferson ASC 2                                       2,570      3,037            0
 Multi          Progressive Surgery Center, LLC    1
                                                                           2,886      1,510        2,092
 Multi          South Shore Surgery Center                                 4,828      3,389        3,856
 Multi          Suf folk Surgery Center                                    5,724      3,655        3,953
 Multi          The Center f or Advanced Spine & Joint Surgery               N/A        N/A            0
                (opened 8/30/21) 2
 Total Visits                                                             43,793     31,836      32,442
1   SPARCS 2020 & 2021 data is for a partial year.
2
    No SPARCS data located for 2021.

According to Data USA, in 2019, 95.7% of the population of Suffolk County has health coverage as follows:

    Employer Plans        58.7%
    Medicaid              10.8%
    Medicare              13.6%
    Non-Group Plans       12.1%
    Military or VA        0.542%

The applicant projects 1,100 procedures in the first year and 1,553 by the third. These projections are
based on the current practices of participating surgeons. The applicant states that all of the procedures
moving to this center are currently being performed in an office-based setting. The table below shows the
projected payor source utilization for Years One and Three.

                           Year One                       Year Three
    Payor            Procedures      %               Procedures      %
    Medicaid FFS               5    0.45%                     7     0.45%
    Medicaid MC               50    4.55%                    71     4.57%
    Medicare FFS             165   15.00%                   233    15.00%
    Medicare MC              110   10.00%                   156    10.05%
    Comm FFS                 246   22.36%                   347    22.34%
    Comm MC                  193   17.55%                   273    17.58%
    Private Pay              309   28.09%                   434    27.95%
    Charity Care              22    2.00%                    32     2.06%
    Total                  1,100 100.00%                  1,553 100.00%

The Center plans to obtain contracts with the following Medicaid Managed care plans: Affinity, Healthfirst,
and United Healthcare. The Center will work collaboratively with local Federally Qualified Health Centers
(FQHC) and others to provide service to the under-insured in their service area. The Center has
developed a financial assistance policy with a sliding fee scale to be utilized when the Center is
operational.



                                        Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 4
Conclusion
Approval of this project will allow for continued access to oral and maxillofacial surgery services in an
outpatient setting for the residents of Suffolk County.



                                       Program Analysis
Program Description
 Proposed Operator                    Oral Maxillofacial S.C, LLC
 Doing Business As                    Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC
 Site Address                         400 Townline Road
                                      Hauppauge, New York 11788 (Suffolk County)
 Surgical Specialties                 Single-Specialty-Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
 Operating Rooms                      0
 Procedure Rooms                      3
 Hours of Operation                   Thursday and Friday 7:00 am to 3 pm
 Staffing (1st Year / 3rd Year)       7.20 FTEs / 12.35 FTEs
 Medical Director(s)                  Lynn Pierri, DDS, MDS
 Emergency, In-Patient, and           Is expected to be provided by:
 Backup Support Services              St. Catherine of Siena Hospital
 Agreement and Distance               4.4 Miles / 11 minutes
 On-call service                      Patients who require assistance during off-hours will engage the
                                      24-hour answering service to reach the on-call surgeon during
                                      hours when the f acility is closed.

Character and Competence
The ownership of Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC is:

 Member Name               Interest
 Lynn Pierri, DDS           95.00%
 Thomas DiNapoli             5.00%
               Total          100%

Lynn Pierri is the proposed Medical Director and member. She is the CEO, President, and Owner of
Lynn Pierri DDS, MS, P.L.L.C, the CEO and President of Suffolk Oral & Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery
Facility, P.C., an office-based surgical practice, and the CEO and President at Dental Implants of Long
Island, P.C. She was the CEO and President at Voxel Imaging USA, LLC and the CEO and President of
Living Well Essentials, LLC d/b/a American Hair Solutions. She is an Attending Surgeon at Long Island
Community Hospital and was previously a Clinical Assistant Professor at SUNY Stony Brook and an
Attending Surgeon at North Shore Surgical Center. She received her dental degree at SUNY Stony
Brook. She received her medical degree at the University Health Sciences of Antigua School of Medicine
in the West Indies. She received her New York teaching certificate at C.W. Post University. She
completed her residency in Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at Bellevue Hospital Center. She completed
her f ellowship in Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh in Scotland.

Thomas DeNapoli is the CFO of Suffolk and Oral Maxillofacial Center. He assists Dr. Pierri with the day-
to-day facility and property operations management. He has created a portfolio of strategic investments
in both short and long-term residential rental properties. He was previously the President and Co-founder
of Jet Drive General Marine Contracting Co. Inc. which was a company specializing in residential and
small municipal projects that became a subcontracting company responsible for major infrastructure,
residential development, and commercial projects with an annual gross revenue of $20M.

Staf f from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the disclosure information submitted
regarding licenses held, formal education, training in pertinent health and/or related areas, employment
history, a record of legal actions, and a disclosure of the applicant’s ownership interest in other health
                                      Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 5
care f acilities. Licensed individuals were checked against the Office of Medicaid Management, the Office
of Professional Medical Conduct, and the Education Department databases as well as the US
Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General Medicare exclusion database.

Dr. Pierri disclosed two malpractice suits.
    • A malpractice suit was filed on February 16, 2021, by a patient against Dr. Pierri and the
        prosthodontist. The patient underwent extractions, bone graft, and implants by Dr. Pierri
        uneventfully but claimed the prosthodontist took an excessive amount of time to create the
        prosthesis. The case is pending.

    •   A malpractice suit was filed on October 31, 2019, by the patient and alleged pain and suffering.
        The patient received a partial odontectomy (extraction of an impacted tooth) where the root tip
        that was on the nerve was intentionally left behind on the molar to prevent paresthesia
        (numbness) at the patient’s advanced age. Years after the procedure, the patient had an infection
        in the back of her mouth and alleged that it was the root tip. The patient was seen over two years
        after the procedure by Dr. Pierri and the healing was within normal limits. The case is still
        pending.

Additionally, the staff from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the ten-year surveillance
history of all associated facilities. Sources of information included the files, records, and reports found in
the Department of Health. Included in the review were the results of any incident and/or complaint
investigations, independent professional reviews, and/or comprehensive/focused inspections. The review
f ound that any citations were properly corrected with appropriate remedial action.

Integration with Community Resources
For those patients who do not identify a primary care provider (PCP), the Applicant will work with the
patient to educate them on the availability of primary care services offered by local providers, including
the services offered by the Center’s backup hospital, St. Catherine of Siena. Prior to leaving the Center,
each patient will be provided information concerning the local availability of primary care services. This
can be done by any of the clinic’s providers, staff, clinicians, or other persons.

The Applicant is committed to serving all persons in need without regard to race, sex, age, religion, creed,
sexual orientation, source of payment, ability to pay, or other personal characteristics. The Applicant is
committed to the development of a f ormal outreach program directed to the members of the local
community. The purpose of the program will be to inform the community of the benefits derived from, and
the latest advances made in pain management, orthopedic surgery, and podiatry. The Applicant plans to
contact FQHCs within the proposed catchment area. The Applicant will also develop customized outreach
materials and resources to connect with targeted populations. As part of the Center’s commitment to
enhance access for underserved populations, the Center will contract with two or more Medicaid
managed care plans and will see to work collaboratively with other Article 28 providers to develop referral
and other collaborative arrangements to enhance access to ASC services to Medicaid and charity care
patients.

The Center also plans to coordinate its services with inpatient and or specialty ambulatory facilities to
which a patient is referred. The Applicant will also develop a Quality Assurance Program that will include
an analysis of the effectiveness of the coordination efforts. The Applicant also commits to providing
charity care f or persons without the ability to pay and to utilize a discounted fee scale for persons unable
to pay the full amount or are uninsured. The proposed budget includes a projected charity care allowance
of 2% and projects Medicaid patients at 5%. Self-pay patients projected as 28% of the budget will be
of fered the discounted rates depending on their ability to pay. However, admission for surgery will be
based solely on medical need and ability to pay will not be a factor.

The Center intends to use an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) program that is compatible with New
York’s RHIO and/or Health Information Exchange. The Applicant commits to becoming a network provider
in the provider-led health homes designated by the Department for Suffolk County. The Applicant will
consider joining any Accountable Care Organization (ACO) that includes dental care as part of its ACO


                                     Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 6
contract. The Applicant will make a decision regarding joining ACOs in keeping with its operating
agreement.

Conclusion
Based on the information reviewed, staff found nothing that would reflect adversely upon the applicants’
character and competence or standing in the community.



                                    Financial Analysis
Total Project Cost and Financing
The total project cost for renovations and movable equipment is estimated at $3,719,676 and will be
f inanced with equity.

 Renovation & Demolition               $2,223,000
 Design Contingency                       222,300
 Construction Contingency                 222,300
 Architect/Engineering Fees               220,087
 Construction Manager Fees                174,958
 Other Fees                               390,000
 Movable Equipment                        244,696
 Application Fees                           2,000
 Additional Processing Fees                20,335
 Total Project Cost                    $3,719,676

BFA Attachment A is the net worth summary for the members of Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center,
LLC, which shows sufficient resources to meet the construction equity requirement.

Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted the first and third year projected operating budgets, as summarized below:

                                  Year One                     Year Three
                                     2024                          2026
 Revenues                 Per Visit.       Total        Per Visit.       Total
 Medicaid FFS             $1,334.20          $6,671     $1,335.14          $9,346
 Medicaid MC              $1,200.66          60,033     $1,191.32          84,584
 Medicare FFS             $2,187.04         360,862     $2,466.87         574,780
 Medicare MC              $1,964.97         216,147     $2,216.04         345,703
 Commercial FFS           $2,731.20         671,874     $3,018.61       1,047,459
 Commercial MC            $2,484.11         479,434     $2,892.34         789,609
 Private Pay              $1,308.14         404,214     $ 1,481.51        642,974
 Total Revenues                          $2,199,235                   $3,494,455

 Expenses
 Operating                 $1,320.04      $1,452,048    $1,393.59      $2,164,248
 Capital                     $349.93         384,924      $255.67         397,049
 Total Expenses            $1,669.97      $1,836,972    $1,649.26      $2,561,297

 Net Income (Loss)                         $362,263                     $933,158

 Procedures                                    1,100                        1,553
 Cost Per Procedure                        $1,669.97                    $1,649.26



                                    Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 7
The f ollowing is noted with respect to the submitted ASC budget.
 • The Medicaid Fee-for-Service (FFS) rate is based on the ambulatory patient group (APG) for the
     downstate region multiplied by APG weight. Medicaid Managed Care (MC) rate is estimated at
     approximately 90% of the Medicaid FFS rate.
 • Medicare FFS rate is projected at the Federal government rate for FASC with the Medicare MC rate
     estimated at approximately 90% of the Medicare FFS rate.
 • The Commercial FFS and MC rates are based on approximately 125% and 114% of the Medicare
     FFS rate with private payers reflecting a 60% adjustment to the Medicare FFS rate.
 • Utilization by payor is based on the member physician’s existing office-based surgical practice payer
     mix and adjustments for community outreach.
 • The number and mix of staff were determined by the experience of Lynn Pierri, DDS, MS in providing
     outpatient oral and maxillofacial surgery services.
 • Expenses are based upon the experience of Lynn Pierri, DDS, MS in providing outpatient oral and
     maxillofacial surgical services in an office-based surgical practice.
 • Utilization by payor source for Years One and Three are summarized below:

                                   Year One                   Year Three
       Payor                 Procedures     %           Procedures        %
       Medicaid FFS                5        0.45%              7         0.45%
       Medicaid MC                50        4.55%             71         4.57%
       Medicare FFS              165      15.00%             233       15.00%
       Medicare MC               110      10.00%             156       10.05%
       Commercial FFS            246      22.36%             347       22.34%
       Commercial MC             193      17.55%             273       17.58%
       Private Pay               309      28.09%             434       27.95%
       Charity Care               22        2.00%             32         2.06%
       Total                    1100         100%           1553          100%

Lease Rental Agreement
The applicant has submitted a draft Lease Agreement, the terms are summarized below:

 Premises:        4,732 rentable square feet at 400 Townline Road, Hauppauge, NY 11788
 Landlord:        400 Townline LLC and Townline 400 LLC
 Lessee:          Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC
 Term:            5 Years with a renewal of one (1) 5-year term
 Rental:          $118,302 1st year ($25 per sq. ft.); 5% annual increase; renewal 3.5% annual
                  rent increase
 Provisions:      Maintenance and increases in taxes, insurance, and utilities.

The lease arrangement is a non-arms-length agreement. The applicant has submitted an affidavit
attesting to the common members between the landlord and the operator. Letters from two NYS licensed
realtors have been provided attesting to the rental rate being of fair market value.

Capability and Feasibility
Total project costs of $3,719,676 will be funded via members’ equity. The working capital requirement is
estimated at $426,883 based on two months of third-year expenses and will be financed via members’
equity. BFA Attachment A is the members’ net worth, which shows sufficient resources to meet the
project and working capital equity requirements. BFA Attachment B is Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery
Center, LLC’s pro forma balance sheet, which shows operations will start with $4,146,559 in equity.
Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center estimates a first and third-year operating surplus of $362,263
and $933,158, respectively. The budget appears reasonable.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.


                                    Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 8
                                      Attachments

BHFP Attachment    Map
BFA Attachment A   Members’ Net Worth Summary
BFA Attachment B   Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC., Pro Forma Balance Sheet




                            Project #221191-B Exhibit Page 9
                                          RESOLUTION


               RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish and construct a single-specialty freestanding ambulatory surgery center (FASC) at 400
Townline Road, Hauppauge, specializing in oral and maxillofacial surgical procedures, and with
the contingencies, if any, as set forth below and providing that each applicant fulfills the
contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with reference to the application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                221191 B                 Maxillofacial Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

 Approval with an expiration of the operating certificate five years from the date of its
 issuance, contingent upon:
 1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New
     York State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all
     construction applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council
     shall pay an additional fee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of
     the project, exclusive of CON fees. [PMU]
 2. The submission of State Hospital Code (SHC) Drawings for review and approval, as
     described in BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
 3. The submission of Engineering (MEP) Drawings for review and approval, as described in
     BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
 4. Submission of an executed lease agreement, acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
 5. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization, acceptable
     to the Department. [CSL]
 6. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement, acceptable to
     the Department. [CSL]
 7. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to the
     Department. [CSL]
 8. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department.
     [HSP]
 9. Submission by the governing body of the ambulatory surgery center of an Organizational
     Mission Statement which identifies, at a minimum, the populations and communities to be
     served by the center, including underserved populations (such as racial and ethnic minorities,
     women, and handicapped persons) and the center’s commitment to meet the health care
     needs of the community, including the provision of services to those in need regardless of
     ability to pay. The statement shall also include commitment to the development of policies
     and procedures to assure that charity care is available to those who cannot afford to pay.
     [RNR]
10. Submission of a signed agreement with an outside, independent entity satisfactory to the
     Department to provide annual reports to DOH. Reports are due no later than April 1st for the
     prior year and are to be based upon the calendar year. Submission of annual reports will
     begin after the first full or, if greater or equal to six months after the date of certification,
     partial year of operation. Reports should include: a. Data displaying actual utilization
     including procedures; b. Data displaying the breakdown of visits by payor source; c. Data
     displaying the number of patients who needed follow-up care in a hospital within seven days
     after ambulatory surgery; d. Data displaying the number of emergency transfers to a hospital;
     e. Data displaying the percentage of charity care provided; f. The number of nosocomial
     infections recorded during the year reported; g. A list of all efforts made to secure charity
     cases; and h. A description of the progress of contract negotiations with Medicaid managed
     care plans. [RNR]
APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by April 1, 2024, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the
   project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the
   applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date.
   [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before July 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by
   January 1, 2024, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies
   have been satisfied prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request
   prior approval for any changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10
   NYCRR Section 710.10(a), if construction is not started on or before the approved start date
   this shall constitute abandonment of the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of annual reports to the Department as prescribed by the related contingency,
   each year, for the duration of the limited life approval of the facility. [RNR]
4. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing
   Submission Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction.
   [AER]
5. The staff of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the
   signage must clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the
   clinical space must be used exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not
   disrupt any other entity’s clinical program space. [HSP]
6. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s
   Health Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which
   facilities must communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt
   of the Operating Certificate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the
   facility’s operations shall submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the
   process to enroll for HCS access for the first time or update enrollment information as
   necessary: https:www.health.ny.gov/facilites/hospitals/docs/hcs_access_forms_new_clinics.
   pdf. Questions may be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment
   Centers at 518-402-1004 or email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                              Public Health and Health
                                                 Planning Council
                       Project # 221206-E
            Northern Westchester Facility Project LLC
           d/b/a Yorktown Center for Specialty Surgery
Program:      Diagnostic and Treatment Center              County:       Westchester
Purpose:      Establishment                                Acknowledged: July 8, 2022


                                     Executive Summary

  Description                                           Need Summary
  Northern Westchester Facility Project LLC d/b/a       There will be no need review per Public Health
  Yorktown Center for Specialty Surgery (Yorktown       Law §2801-a (4)
  or the Center), a Delaware Limited Liability
  Company Article 28 multi-specialty ambulatory         Program Summary
  surgery center (ASC) at 2651 Strang Boulevard         The individual background review indicates the
  Suite 100 in Yorktown Heights (Westchester
                                                        proposed members have met the standard for
  County) is requesting to transfer ownership           approval as set forth in Public Health Law §2801-
  interest to eleven new members and seeking
                                                        a(3).
  approval for eight members previously admitted
  under Transf er Notice 191079. Yorktown’s
  current ownership consists of 15 Class A member       Financial Summary
  physicians that own 91.0% of membership units         There are no project costs for this application.
  and one Class B member, Merritt Healthcare            The total purchase price for the 20.044%
  Holdings Westchester, LLC that owns 9.0% of           ownership interest is $627,622.07 and will be
  membership units.                                     f unded with proposed new member equity. The
                                                        submitted budget for Yorktown indicates an
  There will be no change in services as a result of    excess of revenues over expenses of $1,061,585
  this application. George Pazos, MD, who is            and $1,537,479 during the first and third years of
  Board-certified in Otolaryngology, will serve as      operations, respectively.
  the Medical Director. The Center maintains a
  Transf er Agreement for emergency and backup            Budget          Current
                                                                            Year       Year One     Year Three
  services with Westchester Medical Center, 16.2
                                                                           (2020)       (2023)        (2025)
  miles (19 minutes travel time) from The Center.
                                                          Revenues       $7,922,257   $9,513,335   $10,940,336
                                                          Expenses       $7,918,770   $8,451,750    $9,402,857
  OPCHSM Recommendation                                   Net                $3,487   $1,061,585    $1,537,479
  Contingent Approval is recommended.                     Income




                                      Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 1
                                     Recommendations


Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of the Operator’s Operating Agreement that is acceptable to the Department. [CSL]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by June 1, 2023, including all pre-opening processes, if applicable.
   Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the project by the
   applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior
   approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. The continued submission of annual reports to the Department as prescribed in the approval of CON
   151277 f or the duration of the limited life approval of the facility. [RNR]


Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                     Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 2
                                      Program Analysis
Background
Northern Westchester Facility Project, LLC d/b/a Yorktown Center for Special Surgery, an existing
f reestanding multi-specialty Ambulatory Surgery Center (FASC) seeks approval to transfer 20.044%
ownership interest from 16 existing members to 11 new members and seeks approval for eight current
members who were previously admitted as a result of a Transf er Notice 191079. The existing FASC is
located at 2651 Strang Boulevard in Yorktown Heights (Westchester County). There will be no change in
services or Medical Director as a result of this application. Staffing will increase by 1.77 FTEs in Year One
and 1.00 FTEs in Year Three.

Character and Competence
The proposed membership Northern Westchester Facility Project, LLC is provided in the chart below.
 Member Name/Title                                     Current           Proposed
 CLASS A MEMBERS
 Arthur Pidoriano, M.D.                               7.3428%             5.7652%
 George Pazos, M.D.                                   7.0298%             5.5195%
 Gabriel Brown, M.D.                                  6.7619%             5.2738%
 Gregg Cavaliere, M.D.                                6.7619%             5.2738%
 George Pianka, M.D.                                  6.7619%             5.2738%
 Michael Bergstein, M.D.                              6.1411%             4.8217%
 Yanir Rubinstein, M.D.                               6.7179%             5.2738%
 Donato Perretta, M.D.                                6.7179%             5.2738%
 Barry Krosser, M.D.                                  5.4040%             4.2430%
 John Angelino, M.D.                                  5.4040%             4.2430%
 Scott Russinoff, M.D.                                5.4040%             4.2430%
 Robert Parks, M.D.                                   4.9408%             3.8793%
 William Losquadro, M.D.                              5.4040%             4.2430%
 Kathy Ma, M.D.                                       5.4040%             4.2430%
 Deborah Reich, M.D.                                  4.9408%             3.8793%
 ***Neil Dunleavy, M.D.                               0.0000%             3.1857%
 ***Jason Hochfield, M.D.                             0.0000%             3.1857%
 ***Erich Braun, M.D.                                 0.0000%             3.1857%
 ***Paul Mignone, M.D.                                0.0000%             1.3361%
 ***Opeyemi Daramola, M.D.                            0.0000%             1.3361%
 ***Deya Jourdy, M.D.                                 0.0000%             1.3361%
 ***Raf ael Axen, M.D.                                0.0000%             3.0567%
 ***Steven Cataldo, M.D.                              0.0000%             2.1917%
 ***Gabriel Pitta, M.D.                               0.0000%             0.8767%
 ***Kevin Lee, M.D.                                   0.0000%             0.8767%
 ***Jay Bhangoo, M.D.                                 0.0000%             0.8767%

 CLASS B MEMBER
 Merritt Healthcare Holdings Westchester, LLC         9.0000%             8.5067%
    Matthew Searles (45%)
    Richard Searles (20%)
    William Mulhall (35%)
 Total                                                  100%                100%
***Members Subject to Character and Competence




                                     Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 3
Dr. Giovanni “John” Angelino is an Interventional Pain Management Physician at Northern
Westchester Hospital, an Attending Anesthesiologist at Hudson Valley Hospital, a Partner, Attending
Anesthesiologist, and Pain Management Physician at Mount Kisco, and the President of Giovanni
Angelino, M.D., P.C. He received his medical degree from Universidad Del Noreste. He completed his
residency in Anesthesiology at SUNY Downstate. He completed his fellowship in Pain Management at
Emory University. He is board certified in Pain Management.

Dr. Rafael Axen is the Chair of the Department of Anesthesiology and the Site Medical Director of
Caremount. He was previously the Chief of Anesthesiology at Bedford Anesthesia, the Medical Director
and President of the Medical Staff of the Ambulatory Surgery Center of Westchester, and an
Anesthesiologist at Kaiser Permanente. He received his medical degree from Rutgers Medical School. He
completed his residency in Anesthesiology at New York Presbyterian Weill Cornell Medical Center. He is
board certified in Anesthesiology.

Dr. Jatinder Bhangoo is a Medical Director of Dutchess Ambulatory Surgery Center and the Chairman of
Anesthesia of the Northern Division of Caremount. He was previously the Director of Anesthesia at Mid-
Hudson Regional Hospital, an Anesthesiologist at Anesthesia Associates of St. Francis, a member of the
St. Francis Hospital Performance Improvement Committee, and an Assistant Professor at Stony Brook
University Hospital. He received his medical degree from the Ross University School of Medicine in the
West Indies. He completed his residency in Anesthesia at Stony Brook University Hospital.

Dr. Erich Braun is a Surgeon and Senior Partner at Caremount Medical Group. He is a Volunteer
Firef ighter in the Town of Katonah. He received his medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania
Medical School. He completed his residency in Ophthalmology at NYU. He completed his Cornea
f ellowship at UC Irvine.

Dr. Steven Cataldo is an Anesthesiologist at Caremount Medical P.C. . He was an Anesthesiologist at
Vyaire Medical Inc. and an Anesthesiologist at Revolutionary Medical Devices, Inc. He received his
medical degree from SUNY Downstate Medical Center. He completed his Anesthesia residency at SUNY
Downstate Medical Center. He is board eligible.
Dr. Opeyemi Daramola is a Surgeon in Otolaryngology at Caremount, an Attending Physician at
Northern Westchester Hospital, and an Adjunct Instructor at Northwestern University. He was a Surgeon
at Crystal Run Healthcare, a Surgeon at Penn Medicine Becker ENT & Allergy, an Attending Physician at
Nyack Montefiore Hospital, an Attending Physician at the University Medical Center of Princeton, and a
Clinical Instructor at Northwestern University. He received his medical degree from the University of
Minnesota Medical School. He completed his residency in Otolaryngology at the Medical College of
Wisconsin Affiliated Schools. He completed his fellowship in Rhinology at Northwestern University. He is
board certified in Otolaryngology.
Dr. Neil Dunleavy is an Orthopedist at Caremount Medical, PC. He was an Orthopedist at Orthopaedic
Specialty Group, PC and a Partner at KSF Orthopaedic Center. He received his medical degree from
Georgetown University School of Medicine. He completed his residency in Orthopedic Surgery at St.
Luke’s Roosevelt Hospital Center, Columbia University. He completed his fellowship in Sports Medicine at
the University of Chicago Medical Center. He is board certified in Orthopedic Surgery. Dr. Dunleavy
discloses ownership interest in the following healthcare facilities:
       Tops Surgical Specialty Hospital          2005-2018
Dr. Jason Hochfelder is a Partner at Hudson Valley Bone and Joint and an Independent Medical
Examiner at First Choice Evaluations. He received his medical degree from New York University School
Of Medicine. He completed his residency in Orthopedics at NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases. He
completed his fellowship in hip and knee surgery at Insall Scott Kelly Institute. He is board certified in
Orthopedic Surgery.
Dr. Deya Jourdy is an Attending Surgeon and Director of Rhinology at Phelps Memorial Hospital and a
Business Partner and Attending Surgeon at ENT and Allergy Associates, LLC. He was a Business
Partner, Associate Faculty, an Attending Surgeon at ENT Faculty Practice, LLP, a Clinical Faculty and
Attending Surgeon at the University of Miami Hospital, and a Clinical Instructor at the Department of

                                     Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 4
Otolaryngology. He received his medical degree from Weill Medical College at Cornell University. He was
the Research Coordinator at Weill Cornell School of Medicine. He completed his residency in
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery at New York Presbyterian Hospital-Columbia and Cornell and
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. He completed his fellowship in Rhinology-Endoscopic Sinus
and Skull Base Surgery at University of Miami Miller School of Medicine. He is board certified in
Otolaryngology.
Dr. Kevin Lee is a Cardiac Anesthesiologist at North American Partners in Anesthesia. He was the Chief
of Cardiac Anesthesia and Ambulatory Vascular Surgery at North American Partners in Anesthesia, a
Clinical Coordinator and Research Assistant in the Department of Anesthesia at New York Presbyterian
Hospital, a Teaching Assistant at Columbia University in the Department of Biology, and a Metallurgical
Process Engineer. He received his medical degree from Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine. He completed his residency and fellowship in Anesthesia at New York Presbyterian Hospital-
Cornell. He is board certified in Anesthesia.
Dr. William Losquadro is a Plastic Surgeon at Caremount Medical P.C. and the owner of William D.
Losquadro, MD Facial Plastic, and Reconstructive Surgery. He is affiliated with the Institute of Aesthetic
Surgery and Medicine at Northern Westchester Hospital. He received his medical degree from SUNY
Upstate. He completed his residency in Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery at SUNY Upstate
Medical University. He completed his fellowship in Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery at University
of Illinois at Chicago. He is board certified in Facial Plastic Surgery and Reconstructive Surgery as well as
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery.
Dr. Katherine Ma is an Attending Orthopedic Surgeon at Caremount Medical Group. She was previously
a Physical Therapist at Oxford Health Plans, Mount Sinai Sports Therapy Center, the Department of
Veteran Af fairs, and a private medical practice. She was an Adjunct Faculty Member at the Division of
Physical Therapy and a Research Assistant at the New York Medical College Lyme Disease Clinic. She
received her medical degree from New York Medical College. She completed her fellowship in Orthopedic
Surgery-Foot and Ankle at University of Rochester Medical Center. She is board certified in Orthopedic
Surgery.
Dr. Paul Mignone is an Associate and Ophthalmologist at Caremount Medical and Optum Health. He is
an Owner and Partner at Mignone Medical Eye Care. He received his medical degree from New York
Medical College. He completed his residency in Ophthalmology and his fellowship in Medical Retina at St.
Luke’s Roosevelt Hospital Center. He is board certified in Ophthalmology.
Dr. Robert Parks is an ENT/Otolaryngologist at Caremount Medical PC, an affiliated ENT with the
Ambulatory Surgery Center of Westchester, and an affiliated ENT at New York Presbyterian/Hudson
Valley Hospital. He was previously an ENT at Valley ENT. He received his medical degree from
Columbia University. He completed his residency in ENT and Otolaryngology at Mount Sinai School of
Medicine and Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. He completed his fellowship as a
Research Fellow at New York Presbyterian-Columbia University Medical Center. He is board certified in
Otolaryngology.
Dr. Donato Perretta is an Orthopedic and Hand Surgeon at Caremount Medical, an Attending Surgeon
at the Ambulatory Surgery Center of Westchester, an Attending Surgeon at Northern Westchester
Hospital, an Attending Surgeon at Yorktown Center for Special Surgery. He received his medical degree
f rom the New York University School of Medicine. He completed his residency in Orthopedics at NYU
Hospital for Joint Diseases. He completed his fellowship in Hand and Upper Extremity Surgery at
Massachusetts General Hospital. He is board certified in Orthopedics with a sub-certification in Hand
Surgery.
Dr. Arthur Pidoriano is an Orthopedic Surgeon at Caremount Medical PC. He was President of the
Medical Staff of NYY Hudson Valley and also served on the Board of Hudson Valley Hospital.
Dr. Gabriel Pitta is an Adult and Pediatric Anesthesiologist at East Manhattan Anesthesia Partners. He
was a Staf f Anesthesiologist at Northwest Anesthesia Partners. He received his medical degree from
Weill Cornell Medical College. He completed his residency in Anesthesia at Yale New Haven Hospital. He


                                     Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 5
completed his fellowship in Pediatric Anesthesia at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital. He is board certified
in Anesthesia.
Dr. Yair Rubinstein is an Orthopedic Surgeon at Caremount Medical, PC. He received his medical
degree f rom the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. He completed his residency in Orthopedics at
Montefiore Medical Center. He completed his fellowship in Sports Medicine at Long Beach Memorial
Hospital.
Dr. Scott Rusinoff is an Orthopedic Surgeon at Caremount Medical, P.C. and an affiliated Surgeon with
New York Presbyterian/Hudson Valley Hospital. He was an Orthopedic Surgeon at Community
Orthopedic Associates, an Orthopedic Surgeon at University Orthopedics, and was previously affiliated
with Westchester County Medical Center. He received his medical degree from SUNY Downstate Medical
Center. He completed his residency in Orthopedics at New York Medical College. He completed his
f ellowship in Orthopedic Surgery at the Florida Orthopedic Institute. He is board certified in Orthopedic
Surgery.
Staf f from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the disclosure information submitted
regarding licenses held, formal education, training in pertinent health and/or related areas, employment
history, a record of legal actions, and disclosure of the applicant’s ownership interest in other health care
f acilities. Licensed individuals were checked against the Office of Medicaid Management, the Office of
Prof essional Medical Conduct, and the Education Department databases as well as the US Department
of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General Medicare exclusion database.
Additionally, the staff from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the ten-year surveillance
history of all associated facilities. Sources of information included the files, records, and reports found in
the Department of Health. Included in the review were the results of any incident and/or complaint
investigations, independent professional reviews, and/or comprehensive/focused inspections. The review
f ound that any citations were properly corrected with appropriate remedial action.

Conclusion
Based on the information reviewed, staff found nothing that would reflect adversely upon the applicant’s
character and competence or standing in the community.




                                     Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 6
                                       Financial Analysis
Operating Budget
                           Current Year (2020)               Year One (2023)          Year Three (2025)
                         Per Proc.       Total           Per Proc.      Total     Per Proc.       Total
    Revenues
    Commercial MC        $5,442.34    $5,736,222         $5,988.64   $6,940,829    $633.99      $7,981,953
    Medicare FFS         $1,508.44       988,025         $1,658.13    1,195,510    $504.13       1,374,837
    Medicare MC          $1,729.50       242,130         $1,902.45      292,977    $834.00         336,924
    Medicaid MC          $1,492.15       140,262         $1,647.74      169,717    $524.70         195,175
    Private Pay          $2,546.65        50,933         $2,801.32       61,629    $632.88          70,873
    All Other1           $2,782.89       701,289         $3,063.39      848,560   $1,322.34        975,844
    Total Patient Rev.                $7,858,860                     $9,509,221                $10,935,605
    Other Income2                         63,397                          4,114                      4,731
    Total Revenue                     $7,922,257                     $9,513,335                $10,940,336

    Expenses
    Operating            $2,700.61    $6,073,672         $2,671.69   $6,607,101   $2,657.16     $7,559,623
    Capital                 820.41     1,845,098            745.92    1,844,649      647.89      1,843,234
    Total Expenses       $3,521.02    $7,918,770         $3,417.61   $8,451,750   $3,305.05     $9,402,857

    Net Income                               $3,487                  $1,061,586                 $1,537,479

    Visits                                  2,249                         2,473                      2,845
    Cost/Visit                          $3,521.02                     $3,417.61                  $3,305.05
1 All Other includes Workers’ Compensation   and No-Fault.
2
    Other Income includes interest income of $3,740 and $59,657 in Provider Relief Funds distributions
    YCSS received from the U.S. Department of Health Human Services under the CARES Act.
Utilization by payor source during the first and third years is broken down as follows:
                       Current Year       Year One       Year Three
 Commercial MC               46.87%          46.87%           46.85%
 Medicare FFS                29.12%          29.15%           29.14%
 Medicare MC                  6.22%           6.23%             6.22%
 Medicaid MC                  4.18%           4.16%             4.18%
 Private Pay                  0.89%           0.89%             0.88%
 Charity Care                 1.51%           1.50%             1.51%
 All Other                   11.20%          11.20%           11.21%
 Total                     100.00%         100.00%          100.00%

    The f ollowing is noted with respect to the submitted budget:
    • The current year ref lects the facility’s 2020 revenues and expenses.
    • Staf fing mix is based on the operations of the existing Article 28 ambulatory surgery center and the
       experience of the operator.
    • Utilization in Year One and Three is based on an increase in the number of participating surgeons
       at the center.
    • Expenses are based on the historical experience of the current operations.
    • As of October 12, 2022, the facility had no outstanding Medicaid overpayment liabilities.




                                      Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 7
Executed Lease Agreement
The applicant has submitted an executed lease agreement for the existing site, the terms of which are
summarized below:

 Date:       January 15, 2016
 Premises:   2651 Strang Boulevard, Suite 100, Yorktown Heights, New York, 10598
 Landlord:   GHP Strang, LLC
 Tenant:     Northern Westchester Facility Project, LLC
 Term:       15 Years, with an option to renew for one 10-year term.
             Base rent is $365,400 ($30,450.00 per month) for the first three years, with 3% increase
 Rent:       of base rent thereafter. Additional rent includes an estimated monthly electric payment of
             $4,567.50. Security deposit of $375,840 is due upon execution of the lease.
 Provisions: Tenant is responsible for insurance, utilities, and property taxes.

The applicant submitted an affidavit stating the lease agreement is an arm’s length arrangement.

Executed First Amendment to Lease Agreement
The applicant has submitted an executed first amendment to the lease agreement for the existing site
between GHP Strang, LLC and Northern Westchester Facility Project, LLC, the terms of which are
summarized below:

 Date:       January 18, 2017
 Premises:   2651 Strang Boulevard, Suite 100, Yorktown Heights, New York, 10598
 Landlord:   GHP Strang, LLC
 Tenant:     Northern Westchester Facility Project, LLC
 Term:       15 Years, with an option to renew for one 10-year term
             Base rent is $365,400 ($30,450.00 per month) for the first three years, with 3% increase
 Rent:       of base rent thereafter. Additional rent includes an estimated monthly electric payment of
             $4,567.50 Security deposit of $375,840 due upon execution of the lease.
 Provisions: Tenant is responsible for insurance, utilities, and property taxes.

The applicant submitted an affidavit stating the lease agreement is an arm’s length arrangement.

Second Amendment to the Administrative Services Agreement
The applicant has submitted a Second Amendment to the Administrative Services Agreement (ASA),
summarized as follows:

 Date:                    August 7, 2021
 Company:                 Northern Westchester Facility Project, LLC
 Consulting Company:      Merritt Healthcare Holdings Westchester LLC
 Term:                    7 years with 1 additional 2-year term.
 Consulting Services      Organizing, coordinating, and monitoring the construction of additional
 Provided:                procedure and operating rooms, organizing and overseeing the process of
                          securing third-party financing, assisting with business planning, reviewing and
                          modifying policies and procedures, overseeing accreditation and licensure
                          process, assisting with financial management including preparation of annual
                          f inancial statements and provision of data required for tax and government
                          f ilings, coordinating and managing bookkeeping, accounting and data
                          processing, negotiating with vendors for equipment, supplies, and IT services,
                          administering benefit or insurance plans, human resource management,
                          billing and collections, assisting with administration of utilization, cost and
                          quality management systems, maintain agreed upon insurance coverage,
                          legal services and credentialing support services.
 Developmental            Prepare pro formas, ROI, and financial projections, assist in obtaining
 Services:                f inancing for the project, recommend a site, an architect and builder, and


                                    Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 8
                          manage the design and construction process, attend construction meetings
                          and oversee construction, other tasks as mutually agreed upon by the parties.
 Development Fee:         $200,000 paid in two installments of $50,000 and $150,000.
 Consulting Fee:          $325,000 ($27,083.33/month)

Capability and Feasibility
There are no project costs associated with this application. The submitted budget indicates an excess of
revenues over expenses of $1,061,586 and $1,537,479 during the first and third years of operations,
respectively. Utilization in Year One and Three is based on an increase in the number of participating
surgeons at the center. The total purchase price for the 20.044% membership units is $627,622.07 and
will be f unded with proposed member equity. BFA Attachment A presents the physician members’
personal net worth statements, which indicate sufficient resources overall to fund the equity requirements.

A summary of the 2020 Certified Financial Statements for Yorktown Center for Specialty Surgery is
included in BFA Attachment C. For the year ending December 31, 2020, Yorktown reported negative
working capital and member’s deficit of $584,614 and $2,048,186, respectively. The reported negative
working capital was driven by post-COVID-19 ramp-up of operations and higher operational costs,
negative members’ deficit was impacted by accelerated depreciation and first-year losses. During 2020,
Yorktown reported income from operations of $311,776, which was offset by $371,686 in interest
expense, interest income of $3,740, and grant income of $59,657, resulting in a net income of $3,487.

A summary of the Internal Financial Statements for Yorktown Center for Specialty Surgery for the year
ended December 31, 2021, is included in BFA Attachment D. These statements show a positive working
capital position, a positive net asset position, and a positive operating income of $1,695,463, which was
of fset by $300,731 in other income, and $787,087 in other expenses resulting in net income of
$1,209,107.

BFA Attachments E is a summary of internal Financial Statements for Yorktown Center for Specialty
Surgery f or period-ended June 30, 2022, which shows a negative working capital and negative net asset
positions, and a positive operating income of $1,082,609 which was offset by $457,157 in other
expenses, resulting in net income of $625,452 for the period. Negative working capital and net asset
position is due to financial statements being presented on a cash basis and excluding approximately
$1.5M in accounts receivable.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                         Attachments
 BFA Attachment A      Proposed Members’ Net Worth Statements
 BFA Attachment B      2020 Certif ied Financial Statements
 BFA Attachment C      December 2021 Internal Financial Statements
 BFA Attachment D      2022 Internal Financial Statements




                                    Project #221206-E Exhibit Page 9
                                          RESOLUTION


               RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
transfer 20.044% from sixteen existing members to eleven new members and seek PHHPC
approval of eight existing members, and with the contingencies, if any, as set forth below and
providing that each applicant fulfills the contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with
reference to the application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                221206 E                 Northern Westchester Facility Project LLC
                                         d/b/a Yorktown Center for Specialty Surgery
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of the Operator’s Operating Agreement that is acceptable to the Department.
   [CSL]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by June 1, 2023, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the
   project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the
   applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date.
   [PMU]
2. The continued submission of annual reports to the Department as prescribed in the approval
   of CON 151277 for the duration of the limited life approval of the facility. [RNR]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                                  Public Health and Health
                                                     Planning Council
                     Project # 221213-E
      Performance Surgical Center, LLC d/b/a Performance
                       Surgical Center
 Program:        Diagnostic and Treatment Center               County:       Kings
 Purpose:        Establishment                                 Acknowledged: July 11, 2022


                                         Executive Summary

Description
Perf ormance Surgical Center, LLC (PSC), an               Jonathan Phillips, M.D., is board certified in Family
existing New York limited liability company, requests     and Sports Medicine and will be the Center’s
approval to be established as the new operator of         Medical Director. The Center has an existing
Millennium Ambulatory Surgery Center (Center), an         Transf er and Affiliation Agreement for backup and
Article 28, multi-specialty freestanding ambulatory       emergency services with New York Community
surgery center (FASC). The Center is in leased            Hospital, which is located 1.5 miles (7 minutes travel
space at 1408 Ocean Avenue, Brooklyn, Kings               time) f rom the Center. The Center also has a
County. The center provides orthopedic, vascular,         Transf er and Affiliation Agreement with Maimonides
podiatric, plastic/hand, spine, gynecologic, and pain     Medical Center, which is 4.0 miles (15 minutes travel
management surgery services                               time) f rom the Center. These Transfer and Affiliation
                                                          Agreements will be assigned to the new operator of
On September 21, 2020, Millennium Ambulatory              the Center.
Surgery Center, LLC entered into a purchase
agreement (PA) with Performance Surgical Center,          OPCHSM Recommendation
LLC., f or the sale and acquisition of certain assets     Contingent approval with an expiration of the
f or $2,500,000. The transaction will be finalized        operating certificate five years from the completion
upon Public Health and Health Planning Council            of the application.
(PHHPC) approval. Concurrently, 1408 Ocean
Avenue, LLC entered into a purchase and sale              Need Summary
agreement (PSA) with 1408 Partners LLC. for the           Anticipating new physicians joining the center, the
sale and acquisition of the real property for             projected number of procedures is 3,750 in Years
$10,000,000. According to the real property deed,         One and Three with 25.33% Medicaid and 10.00%
the transaction closed on December 28, 2020.              Charity Care. The center is current with their
                                                          SPARCS reporting.
There is an existing Consulting Services Agreement
between Perf ormance Surgical Center, LLC, and            Program Summary
Millennium Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC, that           The individual background review indicates the
has been in place since September 21, 2020. The           proposed members have met the standard for
Consulting Services Agreement will terminate upon         approval as set forth in Public Health Law §2801-
the Department’s approval of this application.            a(3).
            Proposed Operator                             Financial Summary
    Perf ormance Surgical Center, LLC                     The $2,500,000 purchase price for the FASC
 Members                           %                      operations has been funded via a loan from 1408
 Sandro Starna                     95%                    Partners LLC (the landlord), with no interest and no
 Jonathan Phillips, M.D.            5%                    repayment terms. The FASC’s real property was


                                          Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 1
acquired by 1408 Partners LLC. for $10,000,000 and
closed on December 28, 2020. The real property
transaction was funded via $3,000,000 in members’
equity and a $7,000,000 bank loan with a 10-year
term and 30-year amortization at 3.875% interest
f rom Connection bank. There are no project costs
associated with this transaction.

 Budget          Year One     Year Three
                   2023         2025
 Revenues       $8,511,765     $8,551765
 Expenses       $6,202,895    $6,202,895
 Net Income     $2,308,870    $2,305,219




                                    Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 2
                                     Recommendations


Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval with an expiration of the operating certificate five years from the date of its issuance,
contingent upon:
1. Submission of an executed lease agreement acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
2. Submission of a signed agreement with an outside, independent entity satisfactory to the
   Department to provide annual reports to DOH. Reports are due no later than April 1st for the
   prior year and are to be based on the calendar year. Reports should include:
    a. Data displaying actual utilization including procedures;
    b. Data displaying the breakdown of visits by payor source;
    c. Data displaying the number of patients who needed follow-up care in a hospital within
    d. seven days after ambulatory surgery;
    e. Data displaying the number of emergency transfers to a hospital;
    f. Data displaying the percentage of charity care provided;
    g. The number of nosocomial infections recorded during the year reported;
    h. A list of all efforts made to secure charity cases; and
    i. A description of the progress of contract negotiations with Medicaid Managed Care plans. [RNR]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of this letter, including all pre-opening
   processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment
   of the project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the
   applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s Health
   Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which facilities must
   communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt of the Operating
   Certif icate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the facility’s operations shall
   submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the process to enroll for HCS access for
   the f irst time or update enrollment information as necessary:
   https:www.health.ny.gov/facilites/hospitals/docs/hcs_access_forms_new_clinics.pdf. Questions may
   be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers at 518-402-1004 or email:
   hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP].
3. The submission of annual reports to the Department as prescribed by the related contingency, each
   year, f or the duration of the limited life approval of the facility. [RNR]


Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                     Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 3
                             Need and Program Analysis
Project Proposal
 Proposed Operator                         Perf ormance Surgical Center, LLC
 Doing Business As                         Perf ormance Surgical Center
 Site Address                              1408 Ocean Avenue
                                           Brooklyn, NY 11230 (Kings County)
 Shift/Hours/Schedule                      Monday through Friday 7:15 am to 5:00 pm
 Services                                  Ambulatory Surgery-Multi Specialty
                                             Including, but not limited to:
                                               Orthopedic
                                               Vascular
                                               Podiatry
                                               Plastic/Hand
                                               Spine
                                               Gynecology
                                               Pain Management
 Staffing (1st Year/3rd Year)              35.3 FTEs/35.3 FTEs
 Medical Director                          Jonathan Phillips, MD
 Emergency, In-Patient, and Backup         New York Community Hospital
 Support Services Agreement and            1.5 miles/7 minutes
 Distance and Time
                                           Maimonides Medical Center
                                           4.0 miles/15 minutes

Background and Analysis
The service area of Kings County had a population of 2,736,074 in 2020 which is projected to grow to
2,810,876 by 2025. According to Data USA, in 2019, 93.3% of the population of Kings County has health
coverage as follows:

 Employer Plans              41.1%
 Medicaid                    32.2%
 Medicare                    8.01%
 Non-Group Plans             11.8%
 Military or VA             0.327%

This f acility is located within a Health Professional Shortage Area for primary care and is also designated
within a Medically Underserved Area.

The f ollowing table shows the Center’s Medicaid and charity care utilization for the past two years and
projections going forward:

                                        Years One
                     2020      2021
                                         & Three
 Procedures             531   436            3,750
 Medicaid             0.0% 32.4%           25.33%
 Charity Care         0.0%  0.0%           10.00%

The increase in the center’s Medicaid utilization in 2021 was due to three new physicians performing
procedures at the center. The center is projecting 3,750 procedures in Years One and Three with
Medicaid utilization being 25.33% and Charity Care being 10.00%. This is based upon the expectation
that ten new physicians will be performing surgeries at the center after approval of this project. The
center has f our operating rooms.


                                      Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 4
The center currently has contracts with the following Medicaid Managed Care plans Fidelis, HealthFirst,
and HIP. The center has a ref erral agreement with The Family Centers at NYU Langone to provide
service to the under-insured in their service area. The center participates in a “Second Chance” program
whereby the center reaches out to convicted felons who have no insurance and require surgical services.
Staf f members also attend Alcoholics Anonymous and drug rehabilitation meetings to reach out to this
vulnerable population. The center has a Financial Assistance policy with a sliding fee scale for those
patients who need assistance. The center is current with their SPARCS reporting.

Character and Competence
The proposed membership of Performance Surgical Center, LLC are:

       Name                    Interest
 Sandro Starna                  95.0%
 Jonathan Phillips              5.00%
                 Total         100.0%

Sandro Starna is the President of The Starna Group where he is responsible for managing financial
and accounting aspects with a specialty in medical practices and ambulatory surgery centers. He
communicates with all staff to ensure relevant information and significant changes in data are issued, and
manages credit lines and loans, reviews monthly credit activity, monitors for fraud. He was the previous
Vice President of Finance at Dream Wate where he was responsible for the preparation of the quarterly
consolidated financial statements, reconciliation of all accounts, monthly accrual entries, commission
reports, cash management reports based on accounts receivable collections, overhead cost analysis,
meeting with executive staff and other teams to review metrics, meeting with shareholders to explain the
quarterly results and providing daily cash reports and weekly reports. He was a Tax Senior Associate at
J.Gittleson & Associates

Jonathan Phillips is a proposed member and the proposed Medical Director. He is an Owner of JWP,
LLC, and is a Sports and Regenerative Medicine Physician at Performance Health. He is the Chairman of
the Physician Operations Council which manages operations of the physician group throughout five
Florida hospital locations in the Tampa area. He is a Member of the Physicians Group Board of Directors,
and he updates board members on the operations and processes of the group and manages physician
concerns. He was the Medical Director of S.O.A.R Medicine, a Sports and Family Medicine Physician at
a Florida Hospital, a Founder of the Concussion Center at Florida’s Wesley Hospital, the Medical Director
of the Tampa Bay Storm Football Team, a Consultant Physician for the Tampa Bay Lightning hockey
team, the Medical Director of an amateur boxing and MMA league, a Sports Medicine and Family
Physician at Suncoast Medical Clinic, a Physician at New Tampa Urgent Care. He received his medical
degree f rom the Medical University of the Americas. He completed his residency in Family Medicine at
Latrobe Area Hospital in Pennsylvania. He completed his fellowship in Sports Medicine at the University
of South Florida. He is board certified in f amily medicine with a sub-certification in sports medicine.

Staf f from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the disclosure information submitted
regarding licenses held, formal education, training in pertinent health and/or related areas, employment
history, a record of legal actions, and disclosure of the applicant’s ownership interest in other health care
f acilities. Licensed individuals were checked against the Office of Medicaid Management, the Office of
Prof essional Medical Conduct, and the Education Department databases as well as the US Department
of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General Medicare exclusion database.

Conclusion
Approval of this project will provide for enhanced access to orthopedic, vascular, podiatry, plastic/hand,
spine, gynecology (not abortions), and pain management surgery services in a community-based setting
f or the residents of Kings County. Based on the information reviewed, staff found nothing that would
ref lect adversely upon the applicant’s character and competence or standing in the community.




                                     Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 5
                                      Financial Analysis
Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted the current year (2020) and the first and third year projected operating
budgets in 2022 dollars, as summarized below:
                               Current                   Year One                     Year Three
                                2020                       2023                          2025
                       Per Proc.       Total     Per Proc.         Total       Per Proc.        Total
 Revenues
 Medicaid – MC                               $0    $361.98        $343,884       $361.98        $343,884
 Medicare - FFS          $974.83       214,463     $973.53         979,375       $973.53         979,375
 Medicare – MC           $969.74        83,402     $974.08         380,866       $974.08         380,866
 Commercial - FFS $6,792.59         1,426,443 $6,792.55          6,514,059 $6,792.55           6,514,059
 Commercial – MC       $7,200.00        14,400 $6,576.00            65,760 ,$6,576.00             65,760
 Other                 $3,837.54        49,888 $3,861.37           227,821 $3,861.37             227,821
 Total Revenues                    $1,788,596                  $8,511,765                    $8,511,765

 Expenses
 Operating              $2,773.07    $1,472,501 $1,549.37         $5,810,131     $1,550.34   $5,813,782
 Capital                  $739.67     $392,764    $104.74           $392,764       $104.74      392,764
 Total Expenses         $3,512.74    $1,865,265 $1,654.11         $6,202,895     $1,655.08   $6,206,546

 Net Income (Loss)                     ($76,669)                  $2,308,870                 $2,305,219

 Utilization                                 531                       3,750                      3,750
 Cost Per Procedure                     3,512.74                   $1,654.11                  $1,655.08

Utilization by the payor for the current, first, and third years is summarized below:
                     Current Year         Year One         Year Three
                         2020               2023              2025
Payor            Procedures    %     Procedures    %   Procedures    %
Medicaid – MC             0       0%        950 25.33%        950 25.33%
Medicare - FFS         220 41.42%         1,006 26.83%       1006 26.83%
Medicare – MC            86 16.20%          391 10.43%        391 10.43%
Commercial - FFS       210 39.55%           959 25.57%        959 25.57%
Commercial - MC           2    0.38%         10 0.27%          10 0.27%
Other                    13    2.45%         59 1.57%          59 1.57%
Charity                   0        0        375 10.00%        375 10.00%
Total                  531      100%      3,750   100%      3,750 100%

The f ollowing is noted concerning the submitted operating budget:
  • Breakeven utilization is 2,733 procedures in the first and third years or approximately 73% of the
       expected volume.
   • Medicare Fee for Service rates reflect the current 2020 rates, while Commercial and Private Pay
       rates have been adjusted based on experience at the Center.
   • Medicare Managed Care rates are based on the facility’s current year, 2020, while Medicaid
       Managed Care rates are based on the Center’s average Medicaid Managed Care rate during 2021.
   • Utilization and revenue projections are based on the Center’s additional capacity of 4 operating
       rooms as of March 25, 2021. Only 2 operating rooms were available prior to the expansion.
  • Projections are supported by letters from ten physicians.
  • The projected increase in Medicaid Managed Care is due to three new physicians that will perform
       procedures covered by Medicaid.



                                     Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 6
Purchase Agreement (PA)
The applicant submitted an executed PA to acquire certain assets associated with the FASC, which will
become effective upon PHHPC approval. The terms are summarized below:

 Date:              September 21, 2020
 Seller:            Millennium Ambulatory Surgery Center, LLC
 Buyer:             Perf ormance Surgical Center, LLC previously known as Performance Practice, LLC
 Asset Acquired:    Rights, title, and interest in the sellers’ assets free of liens used in the FASC.
                    Includes tangible personal property, inventory, real property lease, intellectual
                    property, legally transferrable records, phone numbers, email addresses, and
                    goodwill.
 Excluded Assets    Cash and equivalents, account receivables (before the effective date for the
                    Consulting Agreement), contracts (including provider agreements and provider
                    numbers), and organization documents.
 Assumption of      Surgery Center lease between the applicant and the 1408 Ocean Avenue, LLC, as
 Liabilities:       of September 21, 2020,
 Purchase Price     $2,500,000
 Payment of the     $1,500,000 paid into escrow on September 14, 2020
 Purchase Price        500,000 paid into escrow on September 22, 2020
                       500,000 paid into escrow on February 1, 2022

The $2,500,000 purchase price for the FASC operations has been funded through a loan from 1408
Partners LLC (the landlord), with no interest and no repayment terms.
The applicant has submitted an original affidavit, which is acceptable to the Department, in which the
applicant agrees, notwithstanding any agreement, arrangement, or understanding between the applicant
and the transferor to the contrary, to be liable and responsible for any Medicaid overpayments made to
the f acility and surcharges, assessments or fees due from the transferor under Article 28 of the Public
Health Law concerning the period before the applicant acquiring its interest, without releasing the
transf eror of its liability and responsibility. As of October 22, 2022, the facility had no outstanding
Medicaid liabilities.

Purchase And Sale Agreement
As summarized below, the applicant has submitted an executed PSA to acquire the FASCs real property.

 Date:              September 21, 2020
 Realty Owners:     1408 Ocean Avenue, LLC
 Buyer:             1408 Partners, LLC
 Premises Real      Land, buildings, and improvements located at 1408 Ocean Avenue, New York,
 Property:          New York – Block 6712, lot 62
 Payments by        $10,000,000
 Buyer:               $3,000,000 down payment
                      $7,000,000 loan

The real property purchase closed on December 28, 2020, and was paid as follows:

 Members Equity                                               $3,000,000
 A loan f rom Connection Bank (10-year term, interest at      $7,000,000
 3.875%, 30-year amortization)




                                    Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 7
Lease Agreement
The applicant has submitted a draft Lease Agreement; terms are summarized below:

 Premises:           10,000 sq. ft. on the first floor and cellar level at 1408 Ocean Avenue, Brooklyn,
                     NY 11361
 Landlord:           1408 Partners, LLC
 Tenant:             Perf ormance Surgical Center, LLC
 Term:               Ending September 30, 2032. Plus (1) 5-year renewal with a 3% yearly increase
 Payment:            $360,000 ($36 per sq. ft.) with a 3% yearly increase
 Provisions:         Taxes, insurance utilities, and maintenance

The applicant has provided an affidavit stating the lease is a non-arm length agreement. There is
common ownership between the landlord and the applicant. Letters from two NYS licensed realtors have
been provided attesting to the rental rate being fair market value.

Capability and Feasibility
The $2,500,000 purchase price for the FASC operations will be funded via a loan from 1408 Partners LLC
(the landlord) with no interest or repayment terms. The FASC’s real property was acquired by 1408
Partners LLC. f or $10,000,000 and funded through $3,000,000 in members’ equity and a $7,000,000
bank loan at stated terms from Connection bank. There are no project costs associated with this
transaction.

The working capital requirement is estimated at $1,033,816 based on two months of first-year expenses
and will be f unded with members’ equity. BFA Attachments A shows sufficient resources to meet the
working capital equity requirement. Additionally, Jonathan Phillips, M.D. has provided an affidavit stating
his willingness to contribute resources disproportionate to his ownership interest for working capital, if
necessary. BFA Attachment B is Performance Surgical Center, LLC. pro forma balance sheet that shows
operations will start with $1,033,816 in equity. Equity includes $2,200,000 in goodwill, which is not a liquid
resource nor recognized for Medicaid reimbursement. Performance Surgical Center, LLC projects an
operating surplus of $2,308,870 and $2,305,219 in the first and third years. The budget appears
reasonable.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                           Attachments
 BFA Attachment A         Perf ormance Surgical Center, LLC. Members’ net worth summary
 BFA Attachment B         Pro Forma Balance Sheet of Performance Surgical Center, LLC




                                     Project #221213-E Exhibit Page 8
                                          RESOLUTION


                RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish Performance Surgical Center, LLC as the new operator of Millenium Ambulatory
Surgery Center, a multi-specialty freestanding ambulatory surgical center at 1408 Ocean
Avenue, Brooklyn, and with the contingencies, if any, as set forth below and providing that each
applicant fulfills the contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with reference to the
application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                221213 E                 Performance Surgical Center, LLC d/b/a
                                         Performance Surgical Center
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

Approval with an expiration of the operating certificate five years from the date of its
issuance, contingent upon:
1. Submission of an executed lease agreement acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
2. Submission of a signed agreement with an outside, independent entity satisfactory to the
    Department to provide annual reports to DOH. Reports are due no later than April 1st for the
    prior year and are to be based on the calendar year. Reports should include:
     a. Data displaying actual utilization including procedures;
     b. Data displaying the breakdown of visits by payor source;
     c. Data displaying the number of patients who needed follow-up care in a hospital within
     d. seven days after ambulatory surgery;
     e. Data displaying the number of emergency transfers to a hospital;
     f. Data displaying the percentage of charity care provided;
     g. The number of nosocomial infections recorded during the year reported;
     h. A list of all efforts made to secure charity cases; and
     i. A description of the progress of contract negotiations with Medicaid Managed Care
         plans. [RNR]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of this letter, including all pre-
   opening processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute
   an abandonment of the project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the
   responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project
   approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s
   Health Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which
   facilities must communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon
   receipt of the Operating Certificate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight
   of the facility’s operations shall submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin
   the process to enroll for HCS access for the first time or update enrollment information as
   necessary:
   https:www.health.ny.gov/facilites/hospitals/docs/hcs_access_forms_new_clinics.pdf.
   Questions may be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers
   at 518-402-1004 or email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP].
3. The submission of annual reports to the Department as prescribed by the related contingency,
   each year, for the duration of the limited life approval of the facility. [RNR]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                               Public Health and Health
                                                  Planning Council
                                     Project # 221145-B
                                     Apple Care Health

Program:      Diagnostic and Treatment Center                County:       Kings
Purpose:      Establishment and Construction                 Acknowledged: May 18, 2022


                                      Executive Summary

  Description                                              OPCHSM Recommendation
  Apple Care Health, LLC, a New York limited               Contingent Approval
  liability company, requests approval to establish
  and construct an Article 28 Diagnostic and               Need Summary
  Treatment Center (D&TC) to provide Primary               The center will be located in an area designated
  Medical Care, Other Medical Specialties, and             as a Health Prof essional Shortage Area for
  Podiatry services.                                       Primary Care. The number of projected visits is
                                                           6,528 in Year One and 12,920 in Year Three.
  The applicant plans to provide comprehensive             Medicaid utilization is projected at 65% and
  care to individuals living in Brooklyn, with             Charity Care at 2%.
  specific emphasis on residents in Crown
  Heights/ Prospect Heights, with a goal to reduce         Program Summary
  preventable admissions for patients with medical
                                                           The individual background review indicates the
  conditions.                                              proposed members have met the standard for
                                                           approval as set forth in Public Health Law
  The D&TC will be in leased space on the first
                                                           §2801-a(3).
  f loor and basement level of an existing four-story
  mixed-use building located at 1587 Fulton
                                                           Financial Summary
  Street, Brooklyn (Kings County).
                                                           Total project costs of $1,202,557 will be met
  The proposed ownership is as follows:                    through member equity of $120,256, with the
            Apple Care Health, LLC                         remaining $1,082,301 balance being financed
   Members                            %                    over ten years through Hudsonshine Capital at
   All Care Tele Health Corp.        90%                   the f irm’s five-year cost of funds with an
    Joel Kaufman (100%)                                    indicative rate of 5%. The projected budget is as
   Jef frey Berman, M.D.             10%                   f ollows:

                                                              Budget           Year One       Year Three
  Jef frey Berman, M.D., is board certified in
                                                                                 2024           2026
  Psychiatry, Addiction Medicine, and
                                                              Revenues          $910,753       $1,802,722
  Anesthesiology, and will serve as the Center’s
                                                              Expenses           898,942       $1,416,534
  Medical Director. The applicant expects to enter
                                                              Gain/(Loss)        $11,811         $386,188
  into a Transf er and Affiliation Agreement for
  backup and emergency services with Interfaith
  Medical Center, located 0.3 miles (2 minutes
  travel time) f rom the Center.




                                        Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 1
                                     Recommendations

Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New York
    State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all construction
    applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council shall pay an additional
    f ee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of the project, exclusive of CON
    f ees. [PMU]
2. The submission of State Hospital Code (SHC) Drawings for review and approval, as described in
    BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0 [AER]
3. The submission of Engineering (MEP) Drawings for review and approval, as described in BAER
    Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0 [AER]
4. Submission of an executed loan commitment, acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
5. Submission of an executed working capital loan commitment, acceptable to the Department of
    Health. [BFA]
6. Submission of an executed copy of the Articles of Organization of Apple Care Health, LLC that are
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of an executed copy of Operating Agreement of Apple Care Health, LLC that is
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
8. Submission of a copy of Bylaws of All Care Tele Health Corp that are acceptable to the Department.
    [CSL]
9. Submission of an executed Certificate of Incorporation of All Care Tele Health Corp that is acceptable
    to the Department. [CSL]
10. Submission of a list of board members and directors of All Care Tele Health Corp that is acceptable
    to the Department. [CSL]
11. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department, with a
    local acute care hospital. [HSP]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by September 1, 2024, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the project
   by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request
   prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before June 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by June 1,
   2024, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies have been satisfied
   prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any
   changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10 NYCRR Section 710.10(a), if
   construction is not started on or before the approved start date this shall constitute abandonment of
   the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing Submission
   Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction. [AER]
4. The staf f of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the signage must
   clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the clinical space must be used
   exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not disrupt any other entity’s clinical
   program space. [HSP]




                                     Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 2
5. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s Health
   Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which facilities must
   communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt of the Operating
   Certif icate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the facility’s operations shall
   submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the process to enroll for HCS access for
   the f irst time or update enrollment information as necessary:
   https://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/hospital/docs/hcs_access_form_new_clinics.pdf. Questions may
   be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers at 518-402-1004 or
   email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP]


Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                     Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 3
                             Need and Program Analysis
Background
 Proposed Operator                  Apple Care Health, LLC
 To Be Known As                     Apple Care Health
 Site Address                       1578 Fulton Street
                                    Brooklyn, New York 11213 (Kings County)
  Specialties                       Medical Services-Primary Care
                                    Medical Services-Other Medical Specialties
                                        Cardiology
                                        Endocrinology
                                        Gastroenterology
                                        Oncology
                                        Orthopedics
                                        Urology
                                    Podiatry O/P
  Hours of Operation                Sunday through Thursday 9 am to 8 pm
                                    Fridays 9 am to 2 pm
  Staffing (1st Year / 3rd Year)    8.60 FTEs / 14.07 FTEs
  Medical Director(s)               Dr. Jeffrey Berman, M.D.
  Emergency, In-Patient, and        Expected to be provided by
  Backup Support Services           Interf aith Medical Center
  Agreement and Distance            0.3 miles / 2 minutes away

The primary service area is the neighborhood of Crown Heights in Kings County. The center will be
located in a HRSA-designated Primary Care Health Profession Shortage Area as well as a Medically
Underserved Area. The population of Kings County was 2,736,074 in 2020 and is expected to grow to
2,810,876 by 2025. According to Data USA, in 2019 93.7% of the population in Kings County has health
coverage as follows:

 Employer Plans   41.7%
 Medicaid         33.2%
 Medicare         8.05%
 Non-Group Plans 10.5%
 Military or VA  0.222%

The applicant projects 6,528 visits in the first year and 12,920 by the third with 65% Medicaid utilization
and 2% Charity Care. The applicant states a commitment to serving all persons in need without regard
to ability to pay or source of payment.


Prevention Quality Indicators (PQIs) are rates of admission to the hospital for conditions for which good
outpatient care can potentially prevent the need for hospitalization, or for which early intervention can
prevent complications or more severe disease. The table below provides information on the PQI rates for
the overall PQI condition. It shows that the PQI rate f or the primary service area (zip code 11213) is
significantly higher than the New York State rate.

     Hospital Admissions per 100,000 Adults for Overall PQIs
 PQI Rates: 2017       Zip Code-11213      New York State
 All PQI’s             1,889               1,431


Conclusion
The new diagnostic and treatment center will provide additional services to a federally recognized
underserved area.
                                     Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 4
Character and Competence
The members of Apple Health Care, LLC are:

        Name                                Interest
        All Care Tele Health Corp           90.00 %
            Joel Kaufman (100%)
        Jef frey Berman, MD                 10.00%
        Total                              100.00%

Jeffrey Berman, MD is a Member and the proposed Medical Director. He is the Director of Behavioral
Medicine at the Discovery Institute in New Jersey, an addiction and behavioral health treatment center,
the Director of Psychiatry at SOBA College Recovery in New Jersey, an in- and outpatient mental health
and addiction treatment center, an Addiction Psychiatry Consultant at North Jersey Recovery Center, and
a Clinical Assistant Professor of Psychiatry. He was the Associate Medical Director of Behavioral Health
f or Bergen Regional Medical Center and the Medical Director of Summit Oaks Hospital in New Jersey. He
completed his medical degree at SUNY Upstate Medical Center. He completed his residency in
Psychiatry at New Jersey Medical School. He completed his fellowship in Psychiatry at Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School in New Jersey. He also completed a residency in Anesthesiology at Maimonides
Medical Center and Massachusetts General Hospital. He completed his fellowship in Anesthesiology at
Montefiore Medical Center. He is board certified in Psychiatry, Addiction Medicine, and Anesthesiology.

Joel Kaufman is a Licensed General Contractor for Unique Developers Corp. He has successfully
completed numerous ground up and gut renovation projects and is a Corporate Real Estate Broker for
Realty Guardian Inc. He was previously a Real Estate Agent for Microsoft Realty, King County Realty,
and Exit Reality. He was a Volunteer Community Organizer at Cong Shaar Hatfilah where he arranged
community affairs and coordinated daily member services.

Staf f from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the disclosure information submitted
regarding licenses held, formal education, training in pertinent health and/or related areas, employment
history, a record of legal actions, and a disclosure of the applicant’s ownership interest in other health
care f acilities. Licensed individuals were checked against the Office of Medicaid Management, the Office
of Professional Medical Conduct, and the Education Department databases as well as the US
Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General Medicare exclusion database.

    •     Dr. Berman pled no contest that he voluntarily surrendered his license in New Jersey in 1999 for
          being a habitual user of drugs and practicing medicine while impaired by drugs. In New York
          State, Dr. Berman had his license suspension lifted with probation for five years with the condition
          that he is permanently prohibited from practicing clinical anesthesia except for pain management
          and cannot prescribe medication for himself or his family members.

Additionally, the staff from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the ten-year surveillance
history of all associated facilities. Sources of information included the files, records, and reports found in
the Department of Health. Included in the review were the results of any incident and/or complaint
investigations, independent professional reviews, and/or comprehensive/focused inspections. The review
f ound that any citations were properly corrected with appropriate remedial action.

Conclusion
The individual background review indicates the proposed members have met the standard for approval as
set f orth in Public Health Law §2801-a(3).




                                      Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 5
                                    Financial Analysis
Total Project Cost and Financing
Total project costs for renovations and the acquisition of moveable equipment are estimated at
$1,202,557, broken down as follows:

  Renovation & Demolition                  $822,380
  Design Contingency                         82,238
  Construction Contingency                   82,238
  Architect/Engineering Fees                 15,000
  Other Fees                                 75,000
  Movable Equipment                          57,907
  Financing Costs                            21,537
  Interim Interest Expense                   37,690
  CON Application Fee                         2,000
  CON Processing Fee                          6,567
  Total Project Cost                     $1,202,557

The applicant’s financing plan appears as follows:

  Cash Equity (Applicant)                          $120,256
  Bank Loan (5% interest, 10-year term)           1,082,301
  Total                                          $1,202,557

BFA Attachment A is the members’ net worth which shows sufficient resources to meet the equity
requirement. Hudsonshine Capital has provided a letter of interest.

Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted first and third-year operating budgets, in 2022 dollars, as summarized below:

                                   Year One                  Year Three
                                       2024                      2026
                             Per Visit      Total       Per Visit     Total
 Revenues
 Medicaid-FFS                  $171.56      $55,927      $171.56      $110,825
 Medicaid-MC                   $137.24      537,586      $137.24     1,063,917
 Medicare-FFS                  $150.00      146,850      $150.00       290,700
 Medicare-MC                   $120.00       39,120      $120.00        77,520
 Commercial-FFS                $150.00       68,550      $150.00       135,600
 Commercial-MC                 $130.00       25,480      $130.00        50,440
 Private Pay                   $190.00       37,240      $190.00        73,720
 Total                                     $910,753                 $1,802,722

 Expenses
 Operating                      $99.45     $649,196       $91.33 $1,179,995
 Capital                        $38.26      249,746       $18.31    236,539
 Total                         $137.71     $898,942      $109.64 $1,416,534

 Net Income                                  $11,811                   $386,188

 Total Visits                                  6,528                     12,920
 Cost per Visits                             $137.71                    $109.64

Utilization broken down by payor source during Year One and Year Three is as follows:

                                    Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 6
                           Year One               Year Three
                              2024                    2026
 Payor                  Visits      %          Visits        %
 Medicaid-FFS               326 4.99%               646    5.00%
 Medicaid-MC              3,917 60.01%            7,752 60.00%
 Medicare-FFS               979 15.00%            1,938 15.00%
 Medicare-MC                326 4.99%               646    5.00%
 Commercial-FFS             457 7.00%               904    7.00%
 Commercial-MC              196 3.00%               388    3.00%
 Private Pay                196 3.00%               388    3.00%
 Charity                    131 2.01%               258    2.00%
 Total                    6,528    100%          12,920     100%

The f ollowing is noted with respect to the submitted budget:
   • Medicaid Fee for Service (FFS) rate is based upon the basic per-visit rate plus cost of capital
         obtained from the Bureau of D&TC Reimbursement. Medicaid Managed Care is assumed to be
         80% of the Medicaid FFS’s basic rate.
   • Medicare FFS rate is based on the Medicare Part B fee schedule with the Medicare Managed
         Care assumed to be at 80% of the Medicare FFS rate. The rate f or Commercial Fee for Service
         is based on the Medicare Part B fee schedule while the Commercial managed care rate is
         approximately 86% of the Medicare Part B fee schedule.
   • Staf fing and expenses were based on the specific staff requirements to properly and efficiently
         operate the D&TC along with a review of similar type and size diagnostic and treatment center
         cost reports.
   • Utilization by payor source is based on the demographic of the service area which includes
         Crown Heights, Prospect Heights, and Weeksville located in Brooklyn Community District 8.
         Which is a medically underserved area, mental health professional shortage area (MHPSA), and
         health professional shortage area (HPSA).
   • Utilization is expected to grow from an increase in demand, community network relationships,
         hospital affiliations, and marketing. Discussions have already taken place with a representative
         of Interfaith Medical Center/One Brooklyn Health system, the proposed hospital for backup and
         emergency services, to receive patients at the center who are in need of outpatient services and
         help to minimize the readmission of patients to the hospital by providing an available source of
         primary and other outpatient care.
   • Breakeven utilization for the first year is 6,444 visits.

Lease Rental Agreement
The applicant has submitted an executed lease for the proposed site, the terms of which are summarized
below:

  Date:         April 1, 2022
  Premises:     3,400 square f eet located at 1587 Fulton Street, Brooklyn, NY 11213
  Landlord:     Fulton Unique Residence, LLC
  Lessee:       Apple Care Health, LLC.
  Term:         11 years, base rent at $108,000 in year one ($31.77 per sq. ft.)
  Provisions:   Utilities, Maintenance, Insurance and Taxes

The applicant has provided an affidavit attesting that the lease is a non-arms-length agreement because
Joel Kaufman is the sole member of the landlord and a member of the operator. Letters from two NYS
licensed realtors have been provided attesting to the rental rate being of fair market value.

Capability and Feasibility
Total project costs of $1,202,557 will be met through member equity of $120,256, with the remaining
$1,082,301 balance being financed over ten years through Hudsonshine Capital at the above-stated
terms.

                                    Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 7
Working capital requirements are estimated at $236,088, based on two months of third-year expenses.
Funding will be as follows: $118,044 from member equity with the remaining $118,044 satisfied through a
three-year loan f rom Hudsonshine Capital at the firm’s five-year cost of funds with an indicative interest
rate of 5%. Hudsonshine Capital has provided a letter of interest. Review of BFA Attachments A reveals
Joel Kaufman has sufficient resources to meet all the equity requirements. BFA Attachment B is Apple
Care Health LLC’s pro forma balance sheet that shows operations will start with $238,300 equity. The
Center projects an operating surplus of $11,811 and $386,188 in the first and third years. The applicant’s
budgets appear to be reasonable.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                         Attachments
 BHFP Attachment          Map
 BFA Attachment A         Net Worth Statements of Proposed Members of Apple Care Health, LLC
 BFA Attachment B         Pro Forma Balance Sheet of Apple Care Health, LLC




                                    Project #221145-B Exhibit Page 8
                                          RESOLUTION


               RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish and construct a new diagnostic and treatment center at 1578 Fulton Street, Brooklyn,
and with the contingencies, if any, as set forth below and providing that each applicant fulfills
the contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with reference to the application, and be it
further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                221145 B                 Apple Care Health
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New
    York State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all
    construction applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council
    shall pay an additional fee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of
    the project, exclusive of CON fees. [PMU]
2. The submission of State Hospital Code (SHC) Drawings for review and approval, as
    described in BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0 [AER]
3. The submission of Engineering (MEP) Drawings for review and approval, as described in
    BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0 [AER]
4. Submission of an executed loan commitment, acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
5. Submission of an executed working capital loan commitment, acceptable to the Department
    of Health. [BFA]
6. Submission of an executed copy of the Articles of Organization of Apple Care Health, LLC
    that are acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of an executed copy of Operating Agreement of Apple Care Health, LLC that is
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
8. Submission of a copy of Bylaws of All Care Tele Health Corp that are acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
9. Submission of an executed Certificate of Incorporation of All Care Tele Health Corp that is
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
10. Submission of a list of board members and directors of All Care Tele Health Corp that is
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
11. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department,
    with a local acute care hospital. [HSP]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by September 1, 2024, including all pre-opening processes,
   if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of
   the project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the
   applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date.
    [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before June 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by
   June 1, 2024, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies have
   been satisfied prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request
   prior approval for any changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10
   NYCRR Section 710.10(a), if construction is not started on or before the approved start date
   this shall constitute abandonment of the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing
   Submission Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction.
   [AER]
4. The staff of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the
   signage must clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the
   clinical space must be used exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not
   disrupt any other entity’s clinical program space. [HSP]
5. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s
   Health Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which
   facilities must communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon
   receipt of the Operating Certificate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight
   of the facility’s operations shall submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin
   the process to enroll for HCS access for the first time or update enrollment information as
   necessary:
   https://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/hospital/docs/hcs_access_form_new_clinics.pdf.
   Questions may be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers
   at 518-402-1004 or email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                              Public Health and Health
                                                 Planning Council
                      Project # 221227-B
                  Parkchester DTC LLC d/b/a
         Parkchester Diagnostic and Treatment Center
Program:      Diagnostic and Treatment Center              County:       Bronx
Purpose:      Establishment and Construction               Acknowledged: August 11, 2022


                                     Executive Summary

  Description                                            utilization is projected at 55% and Charity Care
  Parkchester DTC LLC is requesting approval to          at 2% in both Year One and Year Three. The
  establish and construct a new Article 28               converted DTC will increase services in a
  Diagnostic and Treatment Center (D&TC)                 Medically Underserved Area where Prevention
  through the conversion of a private practice.          Quality Indicators evidence a possible lack of
  The D&TC will be located in two adjoining              preventative care services.
  leased spaces at 1879 Gleason Avenue and
  1211 White Plains Road, Bronx, with the                Program Summary
  entrance on Gleason Avenue. The applicant              The individual background review indicates the
  proposes to provide primary care, physical             proposed members have met the standard for
  therapy, podiatry, and other medical specialties.      approval as set forth in Public Health Law
                                                         §2801-a(3)(b).
      Proposed Operator
     Parkchester DTC LLC                                 Financial Summary
   Members        Interest                               Total project costs of $4,648,617 will be met
   Neal Polan     95.00%                                 through members’ equity of $1,649,817 and
   Amy Polan        5.00%                                grant awards of $2,988,800 (Statewide
                                                         Transf ormation Grant Award (SW) of $2,700,000
  The private practice, 1211 WPR Medical                 and Capital Restructuring Financing Program
  Services, PC, is owned by David Weiss, MD and          (CRFP) of $288,000) awarded to 1211 WPR
  managed by Neal and Amy Polan. Dr. Weiss is            Medical Services PC, a private medical practice.
  the proposed medical director. Of the D&TC.            Upon approval of this CON, 1211 WPR Medical
                                                         Service PC will cease operations but exist as a
  St. Barnabas Hospital will serve as the backup         business, and maintain the grant awards
  hospital for the Center. Upon approval of this         received.
  application, the site will be known as
  Parkchester Diagnostic and Treatment Center.             Budget        Year One    Year Three
                                                           Revenues       $6,604,238 $9,006,541
  OPCHSM Recommendation                                    Expenses        6,445,977   8,642,377
  Contingent Approval                                      Net Income       $158,261    $364,164

  Need Summary
  The applicant projected 53,375 visits in Year
  One and 72,790 in Year Three. Medicaid




                                      Project #221227-B Exhibit Page 1
                                     Recommendations


Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New York
    State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all construction applications
    requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council shall pay an additional fee of fifty-
    f ive hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of the project, exclusive of CON fees. [PMU]
2. The submission of State Hospital Code (SHC) Drawings for review and approval, as described in
    BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
3. The submission of Engineering (MEP) Drawings for review and approval, as described in BAER
    Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
4. Submission of documentation confirming final approval of the Capital Restructuring Financing
    Program executed grant contract, acceptable to Department of Health. [BFA]
5. Submission of documentation confirming final approval of the Statewide Health Care Transformation
    Program executed grant contract, acceptable to Department of Health. [BFA]
6. Submission of an executed lease rental agreement that is acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
7. Submission of an executed sublease agreement that is acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
8. Submission of a working capital loan that is acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
9. Submission of an Operating Agreement that is acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
10. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department, with a
    local acute care hospital. [HSP]
Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by September 1, 2024, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the project
   by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request
   prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before June 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by June 1,
   2024, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies have been satisfied
   prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any
   changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10 NYCRR Section 710.10(a), if
   construction is not started on or before the approved start date this shall constitute abandonment of
   the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing Submission
   Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction. [AER]
4. The staf f of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the signage must
   clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the clinical space must be used
   exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not disrupt any other entity’s clinical
   program space. [HSP]
5. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s Health
   Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which facilities must
   communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt of the Operating
   Certif icate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the facility’s operations shall
   submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the process to enroll for HCS access for the
   f irst time or update enrollment information as necessary:
   https://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/hospital/docs/hcs_access_form_new_clinics.pdf. Questions may be
   directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers at 518-402-1004 or
   email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov. [HSP]

Council Action Date
December 8, 2022
                                     Project #221227-B Exhibit Page 2
                             Need and Program Analysis
Program Description
  Proposed Operator                Parkchester DTC
  To Be Known As                   Parkchester Diagnostic and Treatment Center
  Site Address                     1879 Gleason Avenue
                                   Bronx, New York 10472 (Bronx County)
  Specialties                      Medical Services-Primary Care
                                   Medical Services-Other Medical Specialties
                                       Cardiology
                                       Dermatology
                                       Gastroenterology
                                       Ophthalmology
                                       Orthopedic
                                       Psychiatry
                                       Urology
                                   Physical Therapy O/P
                                   Podiatry O/P
  Hours of Operation               Monday through Friday 8 am to 7 pm
                                   Saturday 8 am 2 pm
  Staffing (1st Year / 3rd Year)   55.58 FTEs / 81.79 FTEs
  Medical Director(s)              David Weiss, M.D.
  Emergency, In-Patient, and       Expected to be provided by
  Backup Support Services          St. Barnabas Hospital
  Agreement and Distance           5.8 miles / 16 minutes away

Background
The primary service area encompasses the Parkchester and Soundview neighborhoods in Bronx County.
The proposed site is in an HRSA-designated Medically Underserved Area for primary care.

According to Data USA, in 2019 92% of the population in Bronx County has health coverage as follows.

 Employer Plans         30.8%
 Medicaid               41.8%
 Medicare               6.79%
 Non-Group Plans        12.1%
 Military or VA        0.417%


The applicant projected 53,375 visits in Year One and 72,790 in Year Three.

             Projected Payor Source
  Insurance Type         Year One       Year Three
  Commercial                 20.00%         20.00%
  Medicare                   20.00%         20.00%
  Medicaid                   55.00%         55.00%
  Private Pay/Other           3.00%          2.00%
  Charity Care                2.00%          2.00%
Converting the primary care practice to a D&TC will allow for greater access to medical personnel,
including increased staffing, without the need for prior appointments. The applicant anticipates this will
reduce patient wait times, provide more immediate access to care, and have fewer emergency room
visits.

A significant percentage of the area’s residents were born outside of the United States and have limited

                                     Project #221227-B Exhibit Page 3
English proficiency. Parkchester will ensure staff are f luent in the language of the community, and
materials will be available in English and Spanish, with accommodations for other dominant languages as
needed. The applicant plans to provide services in a culturally sensitive manner. Examples provided
include f ocusing on the availability of same-sex providers and extended hours on holy days.

The goal of this project is to reduce avoidable emergency room visits and increase the overall health of
the service area by increasing access to health care. According to the applicant, the proposed service
area is comprised of low-income families who often lack knowledge about health options and prevention
with limited or no access to care.

Prevention Quality Indicators (PQIs) are rates of admission to the hospital for conditions for which good
outpatient care can potentially prevent the need for hospitalization, or for which early intervention can
prevent complications or more severe disease. The table below provides information on the PQI rates for
the overall PQI condition.

 Hospital Admissions per 100,000 Adults for Overall PQIs
 PQI Rates: 2017      Bronx County       New York State
 All PQI’s                2,196              1,431

Character and Competence
The members of Parkchester DTC LLC. are:

   Name                Interest
   Neal Polan           95.00%
   Amy Polan             5.00%
   Total               100.00%

Neal Polan is the President and Principal Shareholder of Insight Management Corp. where he provides
services in strategic acquisition, reorganizations, and operating solutions for small to middle-market
companies in healthcare. He is a Partner and Principal Owner of PMC Medical Management, LLC, and
KABAET 4, LLC where he is responsible for the day-to-day operating healthcare and ancillary healthcare
services for five multi-specialty healthcare facilities. Mr. Polan serves on the Board of Directors of the Dr.
Ramon Tallaj Foundation which offers grants, scholarships, and awards for students committed to the
study of medicine and healthcare-related fields. He led the successful acquisition and management
reorganization of Sterling Optical, which was in bankruptcy at the time of acquisition. He became a Joint
Venture Partner/Operating Partner in Bronxdocs, a system of multi-specialty medical facilities in the
Bronx. He was a Strategic Advisor to Corinthian Medical IPA for over five years.

Amy Polan is the Administrative Manager for PMC Medical Management PC where she is responsible for
the involvement, implementation, supervision, and review of all facets and decisions made that impact
daily operations. She is accountable for decisions that directly affect patient care, the medical office
environment, compliance, and staffing. She interacts with the Office Manager, Human Resources, the
Director of Operations, and the protocol advisor.

David Weiss, MD is the proposed Medical Director. He is the Owner of 1211 WPR Medical Services PC.
He received his medical degree from New York Medical College. He completed his residency in Internal
Medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital. He completed his fellowship in Pulmonary Disease at Norwalk Hospital.
He is board certified in Internal Medicine and Pulmonology.

Staf f from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the disclosure information submitted
regarding licenses held, formal education, training in pertinent health and/or related areas, employment
history, a record of legal actions, and a disclosure of the applicant’s ownership interest in other health
care f acilities. Licensed individuals were checked against the Office of Medicaid Management, the Office
of Professional Medical Conduct, and the Education Department databases as well as the US
Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General Medicare exclusion database.



                                     Project #221227-B Exhibit Page 4
Additionally, the staff from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the ten-year surveillance
history of all associated facilities. Sources of information included the files, records, and reports found in
the Department of Health. Included in the review were the results of any incident and/or complaint
investigations, independent professional reviews, and/or comprehensive/focused inspections. The review
f ound that any citations were properly corrected with appropriate remedial action.

Conclusion
The new DTC will increase access to services in a medically underserved area, where high PQI rates
evidence a possible lack of preventive care services. The individual background review indicates the
proposed members have met the standard for approval as set forth in Public Health Law §2801-a(3)(b).



                                      Financial Analysis
Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted an operating budget, in 2022 dollars, during the first and third years of
operation, summarized below:

                               Year One                   Year Three
                        Per Visit     Total         Per Visit      Total
 Revenues
 Commercial FFS          $125.00       $800,625       $125.00      $1,091,875
 Commercial MC           $105.00        448,245       $105.00        $611,415
 Medicare FFS            $125.00        867,375       $125.00      $1,182,875
 Medicare MC             $100.00        373,600       $100.00        $509,500
 Medicaid FFS            $167.76        451,114       $169.02        $615,064
 Medicaid MC             $126.76      3,383,104       $126.76      $4,613,612
 Private Pay             $175.00        280,175       $175.00        $382,200
 Total Revenues                      $6,604,238                    $9,006,541

 Expenses
 Operating                $95.66     $5,106,056       $100.89      $7,343,857
 Capital                  $25.10     $1,339,921        $17.84      $1,298,520
 Total Expenses          $120.77     $6,445,977       $118.73      $8,642,377

 Net Income                            $158,261                      $364,164
 Utilization (Visits)                    53,375                        72,790

Expense and utilization assumptions are based on the actual experience of the existing multispecialty
medical practice.

Utilization broken down by payor source for the first and third years are as follows:
 Payor                 Year One Year Three
 Commercial FFS          12.00%       12.00%
 Commercial MC            8.00%        8.00%
 Medicare FFS            13.00%       13.00%
 Medicare MC              7.00%        7.00%
 Medicaid FFS             5.00%        5.00%
 Medicaid MC             50.00%       50.00%
 Private Pay              3.00%        3.00%
 Charity Care             2.00%        2.00%
 Total                  100.00%      100.00%



                                     Project #221227-B Exhibit Page 5
Total Project Cost and Financing
The total project cost, which is for new construction and the acquisition of moveable equipment, is
estimated at $4,648,617, further broken down as follows:

 New Construction                          $2,800,000
 Design Contingency                            50,000
 Construction Contingency                     420,000
 Planning Consultant Fees                     216,200
 Architect/Engineering Fees                   505,000
 Other Fees (Consultant)                      150,000
 Moveable Equipment                           480,000
 CON Fee                                        2,000
 Additional Processing Fee                     25,417
 Total Project Cost                        $4,648,617

The applicant’s financing plan appears as follows:

 Equity (Members)            $1,649,817
 Transf ormation Grants:
    Statewide                 $2,700,000
    CRFP                        $288,800

Lease Rental Agreements
The applicant has submitted a signed proposed sublease rental agreement for the space at 1211 White
Plains Road that they will occupy:

 Proposed Date:      May 1, 2023
 Premises            4,184 square f eet located at 1211 White Plains Road, Bronx, New York.
 Sublessor           PMC Medical Management, LLC
 Sublessee           Parkchester DTC, LLC
 Term                The sublessee shall commence on May 1, 2023 and expire on December 31,
                     2026.
 Rental              From May 1, 2023 and ending on December 31, 2023, the rent shall be $146,400
                     ($34.99 per sq. ft.)
                     Commencing on January 1, 2024, Base Rent shall be increased by 2.5%.
 Provisions          The f ixed rent shall include all water charges, utility, and real estate taxes.

The applicant has submitted an affidavit stating that this lease will be a non-arm’s length lease
arrangement in that there is a relationship. Also, the applicant submitted two real estate letters attesting to
the reasonableness of the per-square-foot rental.

The applicant has submitted a draft lease agreement for the space at 1897 Gleason Avenue that they will
occupy:

 Premises         9,060 square f eet located at 1897 Gleason Avenue, Bronx, New York.
 Lessor           Kabaet 3RE, LLC
 Lessee           Parkchester DTC, LLC
 Term             15 years
 Rental           Year 1-5: $320,000 annually ($35.32 per sq.ft.). Every five-year anniversary the
                  annual rent shall be increased by Consumer Price Index for Wage Earners and
                  Clerical Workers.
 Provisions       The lessee shall be responsible for real estate taxes, maintenance, and utilities.

The applicant has submitted an affidavit indicating that the lease agreement will be a non-arm’s length
lease arrangement in that there is a relationship between the lessor and the lessee. Furthermore, the

                                      Project #221227-B Exhibit Page 6
applicant has submitted two real estate letters attesting to the reasonableness of the per-square-foot
rental.

Capability and Feasibility
Total project costs of $4,648,617 will be met through members’ equity of $1,649,817 and grant awards of
$2,988,800 (Statewide Transformation Grant Award (SW) of $2,700,000 and Capital Restructuring
Financing Program (CRFP) of $288,000) awarded to 1211 WPR Medical Services PC. The private
practice, 1211 WPR Medical Services PC, is the awardee of the SW and CRFP grant awards. Upon
approval of this CON, 1211 WPR Medical Service PC will cease operations.

Working capital requirements are estimated at $1,440,396, equivalent to two months of third-year
expenses. The applicant will finance $720,198 at an interest rate of 6% for a three-year term. The
remainder, $720,198, will be provided as equity via the proposed members’ resources. BFA Attachment
A, the personal net worth statements of the proposed members of Parkchester DTC LLC, indicates the
availability of sufficient funds for the equity contribution. BFA Attachment B is the pro forma balance sheet
of Parkchester DTC, LLC, indicating a positive net asset position of $5,368,815 as of the first day of
operation.

The submitted budget indicates a net income of $158,261 and $364,164 during the first and third years,
respectively. Revenues are based on current reimbursement methodologies for diagnostic and treatment
center services. The submitted budget appears reasonable.

Conclusion
Subject to the noted contingencies, the applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a
f inancially feasible manner.



                                          Attachments
 BHFP Attachment          Map
 BFA Attachment A         Personal Net Worth Statement of Proposed Members
 BFA Attachment B         Pro Forma Balance Sheet




                                     Project #221227-B Exhibit Page 7
                                          RESOLUTION


               RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish and construct a diagnostic and treatment center at 1879 Gleason Avenue, Bronx,
perform renovations and construct new space adjoining the existing building – CRFP, and with
the contingencies, if any, as set forth below and providing that each applicant fulfills the
contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with reference to the application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                221227 B                 Parkchester DTC LLC d/b/a Parkchester
                                         Diagnostic and Treatment Center
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New
    York State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all
    construction applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council
    shall pay an additional fee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of
    the project, exclusive of CON fees. [PMU]
2. The submission of State Hospital Code (SHC) Drawings for review and approval, as
    described in BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
3. The submission of Engineering (MEP) Drawings for review and approval, as described in
    BAER Drawing Submission Guidelines DSG-1.0. [AER]
4. Submission of documentation confirming final approval of the Capital Restructuring
    Financing Program executed grant contract, acceptable to Department of Health. [BFA]
5. Submission of documentation confirming final approval of the Statewide Health Care
    Transformation Program executed grant contract, acceptable to Department of Health. [BFA]
6. Submission of an executed lease rental agreement that is acceptable to the Department of
    Health. [BFA]
7. Submission of an executed sublease agreement that is acceptable to the Department of Health.
    [BFA]
8. Submission of a working capital loan that is acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
9. Submission of an Operating Agreement that is acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
10. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department,
    with a local acute care hospital. [HSP]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by September 1, 2024, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the
   project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the
   applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date.
   [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before June 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by
   June 1, 2024, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies have
   been satisfied prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior
   approval for any changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10 NYCRR
   Section 710.10(a), if construction is not started on or before the approved start date this shall
   constitute abandonment of the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing
   Submission Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction.
   [AER]
4. The staff of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the
   signage must clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the clinical
   space must be used exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not disrupt
   any other entity’s clinical program space. [HSP]
5. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s
   Health Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which facilities
   must communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt of the
   Operating Certificate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the facility’s
   operations shall submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the process to
   enroll for HCS access for the first time or update enrollment information as necessary:
   https://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/hospital/docs/hcs_access_form_new_clinics.pdf.
   Questions may be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers at
   518-402-1004 or email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov. [HSP]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                             Public Health and Health
                                                Planning Council
                              Project # 221231-B
                       A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp.

Program:      Diagnostic and Treatment Center              County:       Richmond
Purpose:      Establishment and Construction               Acknowledged: July 22, 2022


                                     Executive Summary

  Description
  A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp., an existing            Need Summary
  New York domestic business corporation,                The applicant projects 8,837 visits in Year One
  requests approval to establish and construct an        and 17,480 in Year Three. Medicaid utilization is
  Article 28 diagnostic and treatment center             projected at 60% and Charity Care at 2% in both
  (D&TC) in renovated space at 1887 Richmond             years.
  Avenue, Staten Island (Richmond County). The
  proposed center requests certification for             Program Summary
  primary care, other medical specialties, and           The individual background review indicates the
  physical therapy, serving both the pediatric and       proposed members have met the standard for
  adult populations.                                     approval as set forth in Public Health Law
                                                         §2801-a(3).
               Proposed Operator
         A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp.                  Financial Summary
   Shareholders                    %                     Total project costs of $466,082 are proposed to
   Ella Goldin                    50%                    be met with $46,608 members’ equity and a
   Anna Marie Dorelien            50%                    $419,474 bank loan for a five-year term with a
                                                         6% interest rate. Hudson Shine Capital has
  Leonid Goldin, M.D., who is board certified in         provided a letter of interest for the loan at the
  Internal Medicine will serve as Medical Director.      stated terms.
  The Center is negotiating a Transfer and
  Af filiation Agreement for emergency and backup          Budget             Year One       Year Three
  services with Richmond University Medical                                    (2023)          (2025)
  Center 2.4 miles and 6 minutes travel time from          Revenues           $1,232,927     $2,438,730
  the proposed Center.                                     Expenses            1,069,482      1,692,541
                                                           Net Income           $163,445       $746,189
  OPCHSM Recommendation
  Contingent Approval




                                      Project #221231-B Exhibit Page 1
                                     Recommendations

Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New York
   State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all construction
   applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council shall pay an additional
   f ee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of the project, exclusive of CON
   f ees. [PMU]
2. Submission of an executed loan commitment for total project costs, acceptable to the Department of
   Health. [BFA]
3. Submission of an executed loan commitment for working capital, acceptable to the Department of
   Health. [BFA]
4. Submission of copies of stock certificates that are acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
5. Submission of a copy of Bylaws that are acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
6. Submission of a copy of a Certificate of Incorporation that is acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department, with a
    local acute care hospital. [HSP]


Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by December 1, 2023, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the project
   by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request
   prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before July 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by
   September 1, 2023, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies have
   been satisfied prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior
   approval for any changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10 NYCRR Section
   710.10(a) if construction is not started on or before the approved start date this shall constitute
   abandonment of the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing Submission
   Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction. [AER]
4. The staf f of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the signage must
   clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the clinical space must be used
   exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not disrupt any other entity’s clinical
   program space. [HSP]
5. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s Health
   Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which facilities must
   communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt of the Operating
   Certif icate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the facility’s operations shall
   submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the process to enroll for HCS access for
   the f irst time or update enrollment information as necessary:
   https://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/hospital/docs/hcs_access_form_new_clinics.pdf. Questions may
   be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers at 518-402-1004 or email:
   hospinfo@health.ny.gov. [HSP]


Council Action Date
December 8, 2022


                                     Project #221231-B Exhibit Page 2
                                         Need Analysis
Background and Analysis
The primary service area encompasses the South Beach and Willowbrook communities in Staten Island.
The f ollowing services will be provided: primary care, physical therapy, and other medical specialties. The
number of projected visits for the facility is 8,837 in Year One and 17,480 in Year Three.


According to Data USA, in 2019 95.9% of the population in Richmond County had health coverage as
f ollows:

 Employer Plans         56.6%
 Medicaid               16.7%
 Medicare               12.7%
 Non-Group Plans        9.53%
 Military or VA        0.336%

The applicant projects the following payor mix:

 Payor                   Year One       Year Three
 Commercial                 14.99%          15.00%
 Medicare                   20.00%          20.00%
 Medicaid                   60.00%          60.00%
 Private Pay/Other           3.00%           3.00%
 Charity Care                2.00%           2.00%
 Total Visits                 8,837          17,480


Prevention Quality Indicators (PQIs) are rates of admission to the hospital for conditions for which good
outpatient care can potentially prevent the need for hospitalization, or for which early intervention can
prevent complications or more severe disease. The table below provides information on the PQI rates for
the overall PQI condition. It shows that the PQI rate f or Richmond County is higher than the New York
State rate.

      Hospital Admissions per 100,000 Adults for Overall PQIs
 PQI Rates: 2017        Richmond County          New York State
 All PQI’s                    1,525                  1,431

With the establishment of A Friendly Face Academy, Corp. the applicant proposes to address preventable
admissions through treatment and education. The applicant cited a 2019 Richmond University Medical
Center Needs Assessment for Richmond County finding that county residents had a slightly higher
premature death rate. Contributing factors included relatively higher rates of smoking and death due to
drug overdose. Staten Island represents a large smoking population (24%), while the Take Care New
York Goal 2020 is 12% or fewer smokers. The applicant plans to provide outreach programs with
community leaders, church groups, and schools to help educate members of the community on the
causes of diseases and identify symptoms to help them receive earlier treatment.

Conclusion
The new center will increase access to services where elevated PQI rates indicate a possible lack of
preventive care services.




                                     Project #221231-B Exhibit Page 3
                                      Program Analysis
Program Description

  Proposed Operator                         A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp
  To Be Known As                            A Friendly Face Akademy
  Site Address                              1887 Richmond Avenue
                                            Staten Island, New York 10314 (Richmond County)
  Services                                  Medical Services-Primary Care
                                            Medical Services-Other Medical Specialties
                                               Neurology
                                               Orthopedics
                                               Cardiology
                                               Pulmonology
                                            Physical Therapy O/P
  Hours of Operation                        Sunday through Thursday 9 am to 8 pm
                                            Fridays 9 am to 2 pm
  Staffing (1st Year / 3rd Year)            11.60 FTEs / 18.49 FTEs
  Medical Director(s)                       Leonid Goldin, M.D.
  Emergency, In-Patient, and Backup         Expected to be provided by
  Support Services Agreement                Richmond University Medical Center
  Distance and Time                         2.4 miles / 6 minutes away

Character and Competence
The members of A Friendly face Akademy, Corp. are:

     Name                        Interest
     Ella Goldin                   50%
     Anna Marie Dorelein           50%
                   Total          100%

Anna Marie Dorelein is the CEO, Clinical Director, and Founder of A Friendly Face (AFF), a treatment
center f or pediatric patients with autism, where she is responsible for training staff to assess the clients
and build treatment plans and work with providers on carrying out treatment plans, conducting workshops
and continuous trainings on various topics related to autism, conduct assessments, and generate related
behavior plans to ensure effective implementation of all treatment and programs for all staff. She also
f acilitates meetings with administrators to ensure appropriate support and services are rendered to each
client, she supervises and trains interventionists to ensure effective implementation of treatment plans
and adherence to professional and legal requirements are demonstrated. She directly provides
instruction, training, and support to students, interventionists, and family members during home and
community visits.

Ella Goldin is the CFO and Founder of A Friendly Face (AFF). She established and operated four AFF
treatment centers in New York City and New Jersey. She established partnerships with hospitals and
providers who treat patients with autism and provide specialized training to ER doctors and medical
prof essionals who serve special needs children. She advocates for the special needs population with a
strong tie to the local community, providing pro bono trainings to the families affected and to professionals
who provide educational services. She contracts and credentials all AFF board-certified providers and
f acilities into the 13 largest medical insurance carriers in New York City and New Jersey. She oversees
Patient Management, Payroll, Billing, Human Resources, Quality Assurance, and Training Departments.
She is an Independent P&C Insurance Broker at Capital Insuring Group. She was a Founder and
Independent Broker Owner at EG Realty, an Analyst in the Asset Backed Securities Department at
Morgan Stanley, and a Junior Analyst in the Equities Management Department.



                                     Project #221231-B Exhibit Page 4
Leonid Goldin is the proposed Medical Director. He is a Family Practice Physician at 21st Century
Medical PC. He was previously an Attending Physician and Emergency Room Physician at Kingsbrook
Jewish Medical Center, an Attending Physician at Park Nursing Home, and an Attending Physician at
Resort Nursing Home. He was the Founder and Independent P&C Insurance Broker of Capital Insuring
Group, the Founder and Independent Broker Owner of EG Realty, an Analyst of the Asset Backed
Securities Department, and a Junior Analyst at Goldman Sachs. He received his medical degree from
Pavlov First State Medical University and Kursk State Medical University. He completed his residency in
Internal Medicine at Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center and Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center.

Staf f from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the disclosure information submitted
regarding licenses held, formal education, training in pertinent health and/or related areas, employment
history, a record of legal actions, and a disclosure of the applicant’s ownership interest in other health
care f acilities. Licensed individuals were checked against the Office of Medicaid Management, the Office
of Professional Medical Conduct, and the Education Department databases as well as the US
Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General Medicare exclusion database.

Additionally, the staff from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the ten-year surveillance
history of all associated facilities. Sources of information included the files, records, and reports found in
the Department of Health. Included in the review were the results of any incident and/or complaint
investigations, independent professional reviews, and/or comprehensive/focused inspections. The review
f ound that any citations were properly corrected with appropriate remedial action.

Conclusion
The individual background review indicates the proposed members have met the standard for approval as
set f orth in Public Health Law §2801-a(3).



                                      Financial Analysis
Total Project Cost and Financing
The total project cost for leasehold improvements, renovations, and moveable equipment is $466,082:

  Renovation & Demolition             $206,000
  Design Contingency                    20,600
  Construction Contingency              20,600
  Architect /Engineering Fees           31,000
  Other Fees                            55,000
  Moveable Equipment                   115,849
  Financing Costs                        9,996
  Interim Interest Expense               2,499
  CON Fee                                2,000
  Additional Processing Fee              2,538
  Total Project Cost                  $466,082

The applicant’s financing plan is as follows:

 Member’s Equity                           $46,608
 Bank loan (6% interest, 5-year term)     $419,474
 Total Financing                          $466,082

Joseph Fuchs, a loan originator, has provided a letter of interest for the loan at the stated terms.
BFA attachment A is the net worth statement of the members of A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp.
which indicates sufficient resources to meet the equity requirements of this application.



                                     Project #221231-B Exhibit Page 5
Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted their first-and third-year operating budget, in 2021 dollars, as shown below:

                            Year One (2023)             Year Three (2025)
                        Per Visit      Total           Per Visit    Total
 Revenues
 Commercial FFS              $165         $145,860          $165     $288,420
 Commercial MC               $120           52,920          $120      104,880
 Medicare FFS                $150          198,900          $150      393,300
 Medicare MC                 $120           53,040          $120      104,880
 Medicaid FFS                $169           74,707          $169      147,723
 Medicaid MC                 $135          657,150          $135    1,299,967
 Private Pay                 $190           50,350          $190       99,560
 Total Revenues                          1,232,927                 $2,438,730

 Expenses
 Operating                   $103         $909,986           $88 $1,540,298
 Capital                      $21          159,496            $9    152,243
 Total Expenses              $124       $1,069,482           $97 $1,692,541

 Net Income                               $163,445                   $746,189

 Visits                                       8,837                     17,480

Utilization by payor source during the first and third years is broken down as follows:

                      Year One (2023)      Year Three (2025)
                      Visits     %         Visits       %
 Commercial FFS          884 10.00%         1,748    10.00%
 Commercial MC           441 4.99%            874      5.00%
 Medicare FFS          1,326 15.01%         2,622    15.00%
 Medicaid MC             442 5.00%            874      5.00%
 Medicaid FFS            442 5.00%            874      5.00%
 Medicaid MC           4,860    55.00       9,614    55.00%
 Private Pay             265 3.00%            524      3.00%
 Charity Care            177 2.00%            350      2.00%
 Total                29,545 100.0%        44,956    100.0%

The f ollowing is noted with respect to the submitted budget:
 • The Medicaid Fee for Service reimbursement rate is based on the base rate plus the cost of capital
     as obtained from the NYSDOH, Bureau of D&TC Reimbursement.
 • Medicaid Managed Care is assumed to be 80% of the Medicaid APG Fee for service rate.
 • Commercial Insurance and Medicare Fee for Service rates are based on the Medicare part B fee
     schedule.
 • Medicare Managed Care and Commercial Managed Care are based on 80% of the Medicare Part B
     Fee schedule.

Lease Agreement
The applicant has submitted an executed lease agreement for site control of the facility, the terms of
which are summarized below:

 Date:         May 1, 2022
 Premises:     1887 Richmond Avenue, Lower Level & Suite I on the first floor, Staten Island NY
 Landlord:     AFF Holding LLC
 Tenant:       A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp.

                                     Project #221231-B Exhibit Page 6
 Rental:       Base rent $84,000 annually ($7,000 per month) for year one, 4.8% increase thereafter.
 Term:         10 years
 Provisions:   Real estate taxes, maintenance, personal property insurance, and pro rata share of
               electricity, water, and gas.

The applicant submitted an affidavit that the lease is a non-arm’s length agreement as the landlord and
tenant have parties in common. Letters from two New York real estate brokers were submitted attesting to
the reasonableness of the rent.

Capability and Feasibility
The total project cost is $466,082 and will be met with $46,608 proposed members’ equity and a
$419,474 bank loan for a five-year term with a 6% interest rate. Working capital requirements are
estimated at $282,090 based on two months of third-year expenses and will be met with $141,045
proposed member’s equity, and a $141,045 bank loan for a three-year term with a 6% interest rate. BFA
Attachment A is the net worth of the proposed members which indicates the availability of sufficient funds
f or stated levels of equity. Joseph Fuchs, a loan originator from Hudson Shine Capital, has provided a
letter of interest for both the project cost and working capital loans at the stated terms. BFA Attachment
C, the pro f orma balance sheet for the applicant, indicates that the facility will initiate operations with
members' equity of $748,172.

The submitted budget indicates the facility will generate net income of $163,445 and $746,189 in the first
and third years, respectively. Revenues are based on prevailing reimbursement methodologies for
D&TCs. The budget appears reasonable.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                          Attachments
 BHFP Attachment          Map
 BFA Attachment A         Net Worth Statement of A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp
 BFA Attachment B         Pro Forma Balance Sheet, A Friendly Face Akademy, Inc.




                                     Project #221231-B Exhibit Page 7
                                          RESOLUTION


                RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish and construct a new diagnostic and treatment center for primary care and other medical
specialties at 1887 Richmond Avenue, Staten Island, and with the contingencies, if any, as set
forth below and providing that each applicant fulfills the contingencies and conditions, if any,
specified with reference to the application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                221231 B                 A Friendly Face Akademy, Corp.
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of a check for the amount enumerated in the approval letter, payable to the New
   York State Department of Health. Public Health Law Section 2802.7 states that all
   construction applications requiring review by the Public Health and Health Planning Council
   shall pay an additional fee of fifty-five hundredths of one percent of the total capital value of
   the project, exclusive of CON fees. [PMU]
2. Submission of an executed loan commitment for total project costs, acceptable to the
   Department of Health. [BFA]
3. Submission of an executed loan commitment for working capital, acceptable to the
   Department of Health. [BFA]
4. Submission of copies of stock certificates that are acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
5. Submission of a copy of Bylaws that are acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
6. Submission of a copy of a Certificate of Incorporation that is acceptable to the Department.
   [CSL]
7. Submission of an executed transfer and affiliation agreement, acceptable to the Department,
   with a local acute care hospital. [HSP]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by December 1, 2023, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the
   project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the
   applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date.
    [PMU]
2. Construction must start on or before July 1, 2023, and construction must be completed by
   September 1, 2023, presuming the Department has issued a letter deeming all contingencies
   have been satisfied prior to commencement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request
   prior approval for any changes to the start and completion dates. In accordance with 10
   NYCRR Section 710.10(a) if construction is not started on or before the approved start date
   this shall constitute abandonment of the approval. [PMU]
3. The submission of Final Construction Documents, as described in BAER Drawing
   Submission Guidelines DSG-05, is required prior to the applicant’s start of construction.
   [AER]
4. The staff of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the
   signage must clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the
   clinical space must be used exclusively for the approved purpose; and the entrance must not
   disrupt any other entity’s clinical program space. [HSP]
5. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s
   Health Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which
   facilities must communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon
   receipt of the Operating Certificate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight
   of the facility’s operations shall submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin
   the process to enroll for HCS access for the first time or update enrollment information as
   necessary:
   https://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/hospital/docs/hcs_access_form_new_clinics.pdf.
   Questions may be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers
   at 518-402-1004 or email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov. [HSP]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                               Public Health and Health
                                                  Planning Council
                      Project # 221265-B
           JAL 28 LLC d/b/a A Merryland Health Center

Program:      Diagnostic and Treatment Center               County:       Kings
Purpose:      Establishment                                 Acknowledged: July 15, 2022


                                      Executive Summary

  Description                                              Need Summary
  JAL 28 LLC d/b/a A Merryland Health Center               The Center is located in a HRSA designated
  (Center), an Article 28 licensed Diagnostic &            Medically Underserved Area and a Health
  Treatment Center (D&TC), requests approval to            Prof essional Shortage Area for Primary Care.
  be established as the operator of A Merryland            The applicant projects 20,354 visits in the first
  Health Center, currently operated by A                   year and 33,300 in the third with Medicaid
  Merryland Operating LLC. A Merryland Health              utilization at 45% and Charity Care at 2%.
  Center is located at 2873 West 17th Street,
  Brooklyn, New York, and is certified to provide          Program Summary
  primary care, optometry, podiatry, and therapy -         The individual background review indicates the
  physical O/P. As part of this application, the           proposed members have met the standard for
  applicant is seeking to add other medical                approval as set forth in Public Health Law
  specialties to the Center’s operating certificate.       §2801-a(3).
  On October 28, 2019, A Merryland Operating
                                                           Financial Summary
  LLC f iled a petition for reorganization under
  Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. As a result,          The purchase price for the facility is $1,600,000
  BNBN Management, LLC entered into an Asset               and will be paid with equity by the proposed
  Purchase Agreement (APA), dated July 30,                 member.
  2021, f or the sale of assets of A Merryland
  Operating LLC. The parties subsequently                   Budget            Year One       Year Three
  entered into an Amended and Restated APA                                      2023           2025
  dated November 1, 2021., The Amended APA                  Revenues         $2,664,282      $4,427,522
  has been assigned to JAL 28, LLC, the                     Expenses          1,990,163       2,884,622
  applicant, through an assignment agreement.               Net Income         $674,119      $1,542,900

  The sole member of JAL 28, LLC is Jonathan
  Liebermann. The applicant will have a transfer
  and af filiation agreement with Coney Island
  Hospital. The medical director will be Leonid
  Ischov, MD.

  OPCHSM Recommendation
  Contingent Approval is recommended




                                       Project #221265-B Exhibit Page 1
                                     Recommendations


Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of an executed lease assignment that is acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
2. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to
   the Department. [CSL]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of the recommendation letter, including
   all pre-opening processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute
   an abandonment of the project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the
   responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval
   expiration date. [PMU]
2. The staf f of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the signage must
   clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the clinical space must be used
   exclusively for the approved purpose, and the entrance must not disrupt any other entity’s clinical
   program space. [HSP]
3. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s Health
   Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which facilities must
   communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon receipt of the Operating
   Certif icate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight of the facility’s operations shall
   submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin the process to enroll for HCS access for
   the f irst time or update enrollment information as necessary:
   https:www.health.ny.gov/facilites/hospitals/docs/hcs_access_forms_new_clinics.pdf. Questions may
   be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers at 518-402-1004 or email:
   hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP]

Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                     Project #221265-B Exhibit Page 2
                              Need and Program Analysis
Program Description
  Proposed Operator                           JAL 28 LLC
  Doing Business As                           A Merryland Health Center
  Site Address                                2873 West 17th Street
                                              Brooklyn, NY 11224 (Kings County)
   Shift/Hours/Schedule                       Monday through Friday 8:30 am to 5:00 pm
                                              Saturday 10:00 am to 4:00 pm
   Services                                   Medical Services-Primary Care
                                              Medical Service-Other Medical Specialties
                                              Optometry O/P
                                              Podiatry O/P
                                              Physical Therapy O/P
   Staffing (1st Year/3rd Year)               10.85 FTEs/18.95 FTEs
   Medical Director                           Leonid Isakov, MD
   Emergency, In-Patient, and Backup          Coney Island Hospital
   Support Services Agreement and             2.0 miles/7 minutes
   Distance and Time

The primary service area is the neighborhood of Coney Island in Kings County. The Center is located in a
HRSA designated Medically Underserved Area and a Health Professional Shortage Area for Primary
Care.

The population of Kings County was 2,736,074 in 2020 and is expected to grow to 2,810,876 by 2025.
According to Data USA, in 2019, 93.7% of the population in Kings County had health coverage as follows:

   Employer Plans           41.7%
   Medicaid                 33.2%
   Medicare                 8.05%
   Non-Group Plans          10.5%
   Military or VA          0.222%

The applicant projects 20,354 visits in the first year and 33,300 in the third with Medicaid utilization at 45%
and Charity Care at 2%. The applicant is committed to serving all persons in need without regard to the
ability to pay or source of payment.

Prevention Quality Indicators (PQIs) are rates of admission to the hospital for conditions for which good
outpatient care can potentially prevent the need for hospitalization, or for which early intervention can
prevent complications or more severe disease. The table below provides information on the PQI rates for
the overall PQI condition. It shows that the PQI rate f or the primary service area (zip codes 11214,
11223, and 11224) is significantly higher than the New York State rate.

          Hospital Admissions per 100,000 Adults for Overall PQIs
 PQI Rates: 2017       Zip Codes-11214, 11223, 11224 New York State
 All PQI’s                         1,533                      1,431

Character and Competence
The proposed sole member of JAL 28, LLC is John Liebermann. John Liebermann is the Operations
Manager of Omega Health Inc. where he plans, organizes, and manages activities for physicians, clinics,
and other health programs, liaises with staff and board members to ensure consistent delivery of care,
and stays abreast of changing laws and regulations and notifies staff. He also oversees areas of financial



                                      Project #221265-B Exhibit Page 3
planning including accounting budgets, reporting, and expenditures, and maintains operational records for
internal and external audiences. He oversees the recruitment, hiring, scheduling, and training of staff. He
develops and implements strategies for quality assessment of treatment services and general operations.
Previously, he was the CEO of SafeGuard Staffing and the Operations Manager of Williamsburg
Pediatrics

Leonid Isakov, MD is the proposed Medical Director. He is an owner of Ocean Medical PC. Previously,
he was a part-time Staff Physician at Staten Island University Hospital, a part-time Physician at Pediatric
Private Offices in different locations in Brooklyn and Queens, and a Pediatric Hospitalist at St. Luke’s
Roosevelt. He received his medical degree from Central Asia Medical Pediatric Institute in Russia. He
completed his residency in Pediatrics at Maimonides Medical Center. He is board certified in Pediatrics.

Staf f from the Division of Certification & Surveillance reviewed the disclosure information submitted
regarding licenses held, formal education, training in pertinent health and/or related areas, employment
history, a record of legal actions, and a disclosure of the applicant’s ownership interest in other health
care f acilities. Licensed individuals were checked against the Office of Medicaid Management, the Office
of Professional Medical Conduct, and the Education Department databases as well as the US
Department of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General Medicare exclusion database.

Conclusion
Approval of this project will allow for continued access to a variety of medical services for the residents of
Coney Island and the surrounding communities in Kings County. Based on the information reviewed,
staf f found nothing that would reflect adversely upon the applicant’s character and competence or
standing in the community.



                                      Financial Analysis
Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted an operating budget, in 2022 dollars, for the first and third years as follows:

                                 Year One                          Year Three
                          Per Visit       Total             Per Visit        Total
  Revenues
  Commercial FFS              $140.00        $712,320           $142.80      $1,188,810
  Medicare FFS                $175.00        $106,925           $178.50        $178,322
  Medicare MC                 $140.00        $569,800           $142.80        $951,048
  Medicaid FFS                $149.83        $609,808           $149.93        $997,868
  Medicaid MC                 $117.86        $599,672           $120.22      $1,000,808
  Private Pay                 $200.00        $203,600           $204.00        $339,660
  Less Bad Debt                            ($137,843)                        ($228,994)
  Total Revenues                           $2,664,282                        $4,427,522

  Expenses
  Operating                    $78.64      $1,600,569            $74.75      $2,489,249
  Capital                      $19.14         389,594            $11.87         395,373
  Total Expenses               $97.78       1,990,163            $86.63      $2,884,622

  Net Income                                 $674,119                        $1,542,900

  Utilization:                                  20,354                            33,300




                                     Project #221265-B Exhibit Page 4
The f ollowing is noted with respect to the submitted operating budget:
   • This entity is currently in bankruptcy and revenue and expense assumptions are based on the
         historical experience of the current operator.
   • Their current Medicare and Medicaid Managed Care contracts are providing reimbursement at a
         level below their actual costs. They are in the process of renegotiating these rates to provide for
         higher reimbursement. Due to ongoing bankruptcy proceedings, they have incurred additional
         expenses not typically associated with daily operations.
   • The Center relocated operations at the end of 2021, and as a result, they incurred significant one-
         time costs related to the move.

Utilization broken down by payor source for the first and third year are as follows:

  Payor                Year One      Year Three
  Commercial FFS         25.00%          25.00%
  Medicare FFS            3.00%           3.00%
  Medicare MC            20.00%          20.00%
  Medicaid FFS           20.00%          20.00%
  Medicaid MC            25.00%          25.00%
  Private Pay             5.00%           5.00%
  Charity Care            2.00%           2.00%
  Total                 100.00%        100.00%

Amended and Restated Asset Purchase Agreement (APA)
The applicant has submitted an executed Amended and Restated Asset Purchase Agreement. The
Amended APA has been assigned to JAL 28, LLC, the applicant, through an assignment agreement.

 Date                November 1, 2021
 Purpose             The sale of the D&TC licensed under Article 28 of the New York State Public Health
                     Law located at 1704-06 Mermaid Avenue, Brooklyn, New York.
 Seller              A Merryland Operating LLC
 Purchaser           BNBN Management, LLC, or its designee, with an address at 4403 15th Avenue
                     Brooklyn, New York 11224.
 Purchase Price      $1,600,000
 Payment of          $50,000 of the purchase price was previously paid by the Purchaser of the Seller
 Purchase Price      upon the execution of a letter of intent for this transaction, $110,000 shall be placed
                     in escrow and $1,440,000 will be paid at closing.
 Assets Acquired     Furniture and equipment, supplies, goodwill the debtor’s domain name, together with
                     all other domain names owned by Debtor, telephone numbers and fax numbers of
                     the Seller, custody of the patient records of the Seller for those patients treated by
                     the Seller, all books and records relating to the operation of the business prior to the
                     Closing, all of debtor’s cash and accounts receivable due to Debtor resulting from
                     the conduct of the Business prior to the Closing Date and security deposits
                     pertaining to any assigned leases.
 Excluded Assets     Employee Benefit Plans and all causes of action, including, bankruptcy avoidance
                     claims, together with insurance refunds and tax refunds.
 Assumed             None
 Liabilities

The applicant has submitted an affidavit, acceptable to the Department, in which the applicant agrees,
notwithstanding any agreement, arrangement, or understanding between the applicant and the transferor
to the contrary, to be liable and responsible for any Medicaid overpayments made to the facility and/or
surcharges, assessments, or fees due from the transferor pursuant to Article 28 of the Public Health Law
with respect to the period of time prior to the applicant acquiring its interest, without releasing the
transf eror, of its liability and responsibility.



                                     Project #221265-B Exhibit Page 5
Lease Rental Agreement
The applicant has provided an executed lease assignment for the site they will occupy.

  Date               October 1, 2020
  Premises           The premises located at 2873 West 17th Street,
                     Brooklyn, New York.
  Lessor             1256 Ocean Avenue, LLC
  Lessee             A Merryland Operating LLC
  Term               10 years
  Rental             Year One through Year Two: $126,000 annually
                     Year Three: $131,040 annually
                     Year Four: $136,281 annually
                     Year Five: $147,402 annually
                     Year Six: $153,298 annually
                     Year Seven: $159,470 annually
                     Year Eight: $153,807 annually
                     Year Nine: $172,439 annually
                     Year Ten: $179,337 annually
  Provisions         The tenant shall be responsible for real estate
                     taxes, utilities, and maintenance.

Sub-Lease Assignment and Assumption
The applicant has submitted a draft Assignment and Assumption of the standing lease agreement, as
detailed below:

  Date               Ef fective November 18, 2022
  Premises           The premises located at 2873 West 17th Street,
                     Brooklyn, New York.
  Assignor           BNBN Management, LLC
  Assignee            JAL 28, LLC
  Term               10 years
  Rental             Year One through Year Two: $126,000 annually
                     Year Three: $131,040 annually
                     Year Four: $136,281 annually
                     Year Five: $147,402 annually
                     Year Six: $153,298 annually
                     Year Seven: $159,470 annually
                     Year Eight: $153,807 annually
                     Year Nine: $172,439 annually
                     Year Ten: $179,337 annually
  Provisions         The tenant shall be responsible for real estate
                     taxes, utilities, and maintenance.

Capability and Feasibility
There are no project costs associated with this application. The purchase price for the facility is
$1,600,000 to be met with equity by the proposed member. Working capital requirements are estimated
at $480,770, which is equivalent to two months of third-year expenses. The proposed member will
provide equity to meet the working capital requirement. BFA Attachment A indicates that the proposed
member has sufficient funds to meet the purchase price and the working capital requirement. BFA
Attachment C, the pro forma balance sheet of the applicant, indicates a positive net asset position of
$3,175,347 on the f irst day of operations.




                                   Project #221265-B Exhibit Page 6
The submitted budget indicates a net income of $674,119 and $1,542,900 during the first and third years,
respectively. Revenues are based on current reimbursement methodologies for primary care services.
The submitted budget appears reasonable.

BFA Attachment B is the 2021 certified financial statements of A Merryland Operating, LLC. As shown,
the entity had a negative working capital position, net asset position, and incurred a loss of ($31,481) in
2021. The applicant has indicated the reason for losses stems from the current Medicare and Medicaid
managed care contracts, which are currently at a reimbursement rate below actual costs. The current
operator has been unable to attract a sufficient number of patients, and due to minimal marketing efforts,
the operations relocated at the end of 2021. As a result, there were high one-time costs that the center
incurred as a result.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                          Attachments
 BFA Attachment A      Net Worth Statement of proposed member
 BFA Attachment B      2021 certif ied financial statement of A Merryland Operating
 BFA Attachment C      Pro Forma Balance Sheet




                                     Project #221265-B Exhibit Page 7
                                          RESOLUTION


               RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish JAL 28 LLC as the new operator of A Merryland Health Center, a diagnostic and
treatment center at 2873 West 17th Street, Brooklyn, currently operated by A Merryland
Operating LLC, and certify Medical Services - Other Medical Specialties, and with the
contingencies, if any, as set forth below and providing that each applicant fulfills the
contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with reference to the application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                221265 B                 JAL 28 LLC d/b/a A Merryland Health Center
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of an executed lease assignment that is acceptable to the Department of Health.
   [BFA]
2. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to
   the Department. [CSL]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of the recommendation letter,
   including all pre-opening processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this
   date may constitute an abandonment of the project by the applicant and the expiration of the
   approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any extensions
   to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
2. The staff of the facility must be separate and distinct from the staff of other entities; the
   signage must clearly denote the facility is separate and distinct from other entities; the
   clinical space must be used exclusively for the approved purpose, and the entrance must not
   disrupt any other entity’s clinical program space. [HSP]
3. The applicant must ensure registration for and training of facility staff on the Department’s
   Health Commerce System (HCS). The HCS is the secure web-based means by which
   facilities must communicate with the Department and receive vital information. Upon
   receipt of the Operating Certificate, the Administrator/director that has day-to-day oversight
   of the facility’s operations shall submit the HCS Access Form at the following link to begin
   the process to enroll for HCS access for the first time or update enrollment information as
   necessary:
   https:www.health.ny.gov/facilites/hospitals/docs/hcs_access_forms_new_clinics.pdf.
   Questions may be directed to the Division of Hospitals and Diagnostic &Treatment Centers
   at 518-402-1004 or email: hospinfo@health.ny.gov [HSP]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                              Public Health and Health
                                                 Planning Council
                      Project # 192204-E
               Highland Nursing Home, Inc. d/b/a
         North Country Nursing & Rehabilitation Center
Program:      Residential Health Care Facility              County:       St. Lawrence
Purpose:      Establishment                                 Acknowledged: October 24, 2019


                                     Executive Summary

  Description
  Highland Nursing Home, Inc., the current                The purchase price for the shares is $1,863,461,
  operator of a 140-bed, proprietary, Article 28          which represents the balance due on a
  residential health care facility (RHCF) located at      $2,050,000 Promissory Note (10-year term at 3%
  182 Highland Road, Massena (Saint Lawrence              interest) made between 182 Highland Road, LLC
  County), requests approval to transfer 100%             (as Lender) to the current shareholders (Lea
  ownership of its capital stock (200 shares) to ten      Sherman, Jeffrey Goldstein, and Alexander
  new shareholders (collectively the “Buyers”).           Sherman as Borrowers) to enable their purchase
  Lea Sherman, Jeffrey Goldstein, and Alexander           of the shares in Highland Nursing Home, Inc. in
  Sherman are the current shareholders of the             2016. The proposed new shareholders will
  RHCF (collectively the “Sellers”). 182 Highland         assume repayment of the Promissory Note to 182
  Road, LLC, a separate entity, owns the facility’s       Highland Road, LLC.
  real property.
                                                          Highland Nursing Home, Inc. leases the premises
  On November 30, 2018, Lea Sherman, Jeffrey              f rom 182 Highland Road, LLC for 30 years. There
  Goldstein, and Alexander Sherman entered into a         is a relationship between the proposed new
  Stock Purchase Agreement (SPA) (the                     shareholders of Highland Nursing Home, Inc. and
  Agreement) to sell all issued and outstanding           the members of 182 Highland Road, LLC in that
  capital stock in the Corporation to David Landa         ownership is overlapping but not identical.
  and Menajem (Mark) Salamon or their designees.
  There were two subsequent amendments to the             OPCHSM/OALTC Recommendation
  SPA resulting in the following proposed                 Contingent Approval is recommended.
  ownership:
                                                          Need Summary
              Proposed Operator                           There will be no need review per Public Health
          Highland Nursing Home, Inc.                     Law §2801-a (4).
   Shareholders:         Shares       %
   Menajem Salamon           60      30.0%                Program Summary
   Mordejai Salamon          34      17.0%                There will be no change in beds or services
   Joshua Landa              22      11.0%                provided. The individual background review
   Joseph Landa              22      11.0%                indicates the proposed members have met the
   David Landa               21      10.5%                standard for approval as set forth in Public
   Suri Reich                10       5.0%                Health Law §2801-a(3).
   Yossi Mayer               10       5.0%
   Blimie Perlstein          10       5.0%
   Hellen Majerovic           9       4.5%
   Tirtza Salamon             2       1.0%


                                       Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 1
Financial Summary
The purchase price of the stock is $1,863,461
f unded through the assumption of a 10-year
Promissory Note at 3% interest. The
$1,863,461 Promissory note balance will be
canceled upon the closing of the stock purchase
agreement, per note seven in the 2021 certified
f inancial statement of Highland Nursing Home,
Inc. There are no project costs associated with
this application.

 Budget          Year One       Year Three
                    2023           2025
 Revenues       $15,057,577     $15,432,907
 Expenses        14,905,708      15,074,618
 Net Income        $151,869        $358,289




                                  Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 2
                                     Recommendations


Long Term Care Ombudsman Program
The LTCOP recommends Approval. (See LTCOP Attachment A)

Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of a photocopy of the Certificate of Assumed Name, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
2. Submission of a photocopy of a list of the Board of Directors, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
3. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Resolution of the Board of Directors, acceptable to the
   Department. [CSL]
4. Submission of a photocopy of executed Shareholder Stock Certificates, acceptable to the
   Department. [CSL]
5. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to the
   Department. [CSL]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by June 1, 2023, including all pre-opening processes, if applicable.
   Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the project by the
   applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior
   approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]


Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                     Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 3
                                    Program Analysis
Facility Information
                           Existing                       Proposed
  Facility Name            North Country Nursing and      North Country Nursing and
                           Rehabilitation Center          Rehabilitation Center
  Address                  182 Highland Road              Same
                           Massena, NY 13662
  RHCF Capacity            140                            Same
  ADHCP Capacity           N/A                            N/A
  Type of Operator         Business Corporation           Business Corporation
  Class of Operator        Proprietary                    Proprietary
  Operator                 Highland Nursing Home Inc.     Highland Nursing Home Inc.

                                                          Menajem Salamon*                 30.0%
                                                          Mordejai Salamon**               17.0%
                                                          Joshua Landa                     11.0%
                                                          Joseph Landa                     11.0%
                                                          David Landa                      10.5%
                                                          Suri Reich                        5.0%
                                                          Yossi Mayer                       5.0%
                                                          Blimie Perlstein                  5.0%
                                                          Helen Majerovic                   4.5%
                                                          Tirtza Salamon                    1.0%

                                                          *President and Chief Executive Officer
                                                          ** Vice President

Character and Competence
Experience
Menajem (Mark) Salamon is a Licensed New York State, and New Jersey nursing home administrator.
He lists concurrent employment at Gold Crest Care Center located in Bronx, NY as a Licensed Nursing
Home Administrator since 2011, and the Chief Executive Officer of Highland Nursing Home Inc. (the
subject facility) since May 2019. He holds a bachelor’s degree with additional coursework. He discloses
the f ollowing healthcare facility ownership interest:
     Advanced Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation (CT)        (2.5%)           10/16 – present
     West Haven Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)              (41.5%)          11/21—present
     Southport Center for Nursing and Rehab (CT)                (41.5%)          11/21—present
     New Haven Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)               (41.5%)          11/21—present
     Waterbury Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)               (41.5%)          11/21—present
     Torrington Center for Nursing and Rehab (CT)               (41.5%)          11/21—present

Mordejai Salamon lists employment as Director of Business Development at Gold Crest Care Center
since 2014. His responsibilities include marketing, implementation of new strategic initiatives, and
optimizing occupancy. He indicates no previous employment. He holds a bachelor’s degree. He
discloses the following healthcare facility ownership interest:
    Advanced Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation (CT)         (10%)           10/16 – present
    West Haven Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)               (7%)            11/21—present
    Southport Center for Nursing and Rehab (CT)                 (7%)            11/21—present
    New Haven Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)                (7%)            11/21—present
    Waterbury Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)                (7%)            11/21—present
    Torrington Center for Nursing and Rehab (CT)                (7%)            11/21—present




                                   Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 4
Joshua Landa is currently a student at Yeshiva Tiferes Yisrael in Brooklyn, NY. He discloses the
f ollowing healthcare facility interest:
      Advanced Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation (CT)       (15%)           10/16 – present
      Torrington Center For Nursing and Rehabilitation (CT)     (36.5%)         11/21 – present

Joseph Landa is currently a financial supervisor at Hollis Park Nursing Home. He has held this position
since February 2021, prior to this he was a student. He holds a bachelor’s degree/. He discloses the
f ollowing healthcare facility interests:
      Advanced Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation (CT)        (15%)          10/16 – present
      Waterbury Center For Nursing And Rehabilitation (CT)       (36.5%)        11/21 – present

David Landa lists employment as an owner of = Dividends and Nursing Homes. He holds a high school
diploma. He discloses the following health care facility ownership interests:
    Windsor Park Nursing Home                                    (22.5%)      6/86 – present
    Sunrise Manor                                                (28.5%)      2/93 – present
    Gold Crest Care Center                                       (40%)        2/96 – present
    Fieldston Lodge Care Center                                  (26%)        9/03 – present
    Af finity Skilled Living & Rehabilitation Center             (15.66%)     12/05 – present

Suri Reich discloses employment at Wellsville Manor Care Center Social Services Department remotely
since 2016 f rom her home in Brooklyn, NY. Previously her employment was Beth Jacob of Boro Park as
a teacher between 2007 and 2016. Ms. Reich has a high school diploma and discloses the following
ownership interests:
    Oak Hill Rehab and Nursing                                (10%)          2/19 – present
    River View Rehab and Nursing                              (10%)          2/19 – present

Yossi Mayer discloses employment at Fieldstone Lodge Skilled Nursing Facility located in Bronx, NY in
the Maintenance Department since 2017. He has a bachelor's degree. Mr. Mayer discloses the following
ownership interests:
    Oak Hill Rehab and Nursing                               (10%)             2/19 – present
    River View Rehab and Nursing                             (10%)             2/19 – present
    West Haven Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)            (1.25%)           11/21 – present
    Southport Center for Nursing and Rehab (CT)              (1.25%)           11/21 – present
    Waterbury Center f or Nursing and Rehab (CT)             (1.25%)           11/21 – present
    Torrington Center for Nursing and Rehab (CT)             (1.25%)           11/21 – present

Blimie Perlstein discloses that she is the owner of P&G brokerage, Inc. since 1994. P&G is an
insurance brokerage located in Brooklyn, NY. Ms. Perlstein has a high school diploma and discloses no
ownership interest in any healthcare facilities.

Helen Majerovic discloses employment at Flawless Dental as a receptionist. She has a high school
diploma. Ms. Majerovic discloses the following ownership interests:
    Oak Hill Rehab and Nursing                                  (5%)         2/19 – present
    River View Rehab and Nursing                                (10%)        2/19 – present

Tirtza Salamon discloses no employment history for the past ten years. Ms. Salamon discloses no
ownership interest in any healthcare facilities.




                                   Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 5
Quality Review
                                         CMS Star Rating Criteria - 10 NYRRC 600.2(b)(5)(iv)
                                                           Duration of Ownership
                                                 < 48 Months                  48 months or more
                                                        Percent of                        Percent of
                           Total         Number of Nursing Homes Number of Nursing Homes
                          Nursing         Nursing      With a Below       Nursing       With a Below
  Proposed Owner          Homes           Homes       Average Rating       Homes      Average Rating
 Joseph Landa                2               1             100%               1              100%
 Joshua Landa                1               0              n/a               1              100%
 David Landa                 5               0              n/a               5              40%
 Suri Reich                  1               1             100%               0               n/a
 Yossi Mayer                 6               6            83.33%              0               n/a
 Helen Majerovic             2               2             50%                0               n/a
 Blimie Perlstein            0              n/a             n/a              n/a              n/a
 Mordejai Salamon            5               4             100%               1              100%
 Menajem Salamon             6               5             100%               1              100%
 Tirtza Salamon              0              n/a             n/a              n/a              n/a
Duration of Ownership as of 12/08/2022
Data Date: 09/2022

New York: Four of the applicants own seven New York facilities. Oak Hill Rehab and Nursing and
Fieldston Lodge Care Center are 1-star overall rated facilities. Affinity Skilled Living is a 2-star overall
rated f acility. Regarding Oak Hill Rehab and Nursing, one of the three health inspection surveys which
were used to calculate the health inspection rating occurred while the proposed owners had operational
control. The 1-star staffing rating is wholly attributable to the proposed owners. Regarding Fieldston
Lodge Care Center and Affinity Skilled Living and Rehabilitation Center, the applicant states:
    This facility’s Overall rating was impacted by the staffing rating, which decreased from two (2) stars to
    one (1) star as a result of a change in the CMS staffing calculation, which provides for a higher value
    being attributed to Registered Nurses versus Licensed Practical Nurses. Since the COVID-19
    pandemic began, the facility has had difficulties with hiring and retaining qualified Registered Nurses
    and has instead hired multiple Licensed Practical Nurses in order to provide the best-possible nursing
    coverage in a difficult labor market…

As f or the subject facility, Menajem (Mark) Salamon, a member of the proposed ownership group, entered
into an employment agreement on May 31, 2019, with Highland Nursing Center, Inc. The May 2019 CMS
Star Ratings indicate the facility had a 2-star overall, 1-star health inspection, 3-star quality, and 4-star
staf fing ratings at the time Mr. Salamon initiated his affiliation. The October 2022 Ratings indicate the
overall, health inspection, quality measure, and staffing ratings are all now 1 star. Per the applicant:
       Mr. Salamon has extensive experience with operating skilled nursing facilities, and it is expected that
       his experience will result in improved Star Ratings at the facility going forward.


Connecticut: Four of the applicants own six Connecticut facilities, all of which are rated below average.
Advanced Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation is a 2-star overall rated facility. As per the applicant:
   The operator is working with clinical and operational leaders to achieve higher quality standards,
   which should improve this facility’s Overall Star Rating to three…” The facility also has a below-
   average, 1-star staffing rating. Regarding the other facilities, the applicants state “The proposed new
   shareholders became affiliated with this facility in November 2021 and are in the process of making
   operational improvements...




                                         Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 6
CMS Star Ratings
                               Ownership                        Health     Quality
Facility                         Since           Overall      Inspection   Measure   Staffing
New York
Highland Nursing Center       Subject Facility     *              *          *          *
Gold Crest Care Center
                                  Current        *****          ****       *****       **
                                02/1996**          *              *         ****        *
Windsor Park Nursing              Current        *****          *****       ***        ***
Home
                                06/1986**         ***           ****         **         *
River View Rehabilitation         Current         ***            ***       *****        *
and Nursing Center               01/2019           *              *          **        ***
Sunrise Manor
                                  Current         ***           ****        ****        *
                                02/1993**         ***            ***         *        ****
Af finity Skilled Living
                                  Current          **            **        *****        *
                                12/2005**          *              *         ***         *
Oak Hill Rehab and Nursing
                                  Current          *             **          **         *
                                 01/2019           *             **         ***         *
Fieldston Lodge Care Center
                                  Current          *              *         ****       **
                                09/2003**          **             *         ***       ****
Connecticut

Advanced Center for               Current          **            ***        ****        *
Nursing and Rehabilitation       10/2016           *              *         ***        ***
West Haven Center For
                                  Current          **            **        *****        *
Nursing & Rehabilitation         11/2021          ***            **        *****       ***
Waterbury Center For
                                  Current          **             *        *****        *
Nursing And Rehab                11/2021           **             *         ***       ****
Regalcare At New Haven †
                                  Current          *              *         ***         *
                                 11/2021           *              *          **        ***
Torrington Center for
Nursing & Rehabilitation
                                  Current          *              *         ***         *
                                 11/2021           *              *         ****       ***


                                   Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 7
                                     Ownership                        Health         Quality
Facility                               Since          Overall       Inspection       Measure        Staffing

Southport Center For                  Current            *                *              **            **
Nursing & Rehabilitation              11/2021            *                *              **            **
† Special Focus Facility Candidate
**Earliest data as of 12/2009
Data date: 09/2022

Enforcement History
River View Rehabilitation and Nursing Care Center:
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $3,250 was assessed on 10/23/2020

Oak Hill Rehab and Nursing:
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $655 was assessed on 12/7/2020
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $975 was assessed on 12/14/2020
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $1,310 was assessed on 11/15/2021
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $1,965 was assessed on 11/22/2021

Fieldston Lodge Care Center:
    • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $5,000 was assessed on 3/2/2022

Advanced Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation (CT):
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $9,750 was assessed for 10/31/18 surveillance findings
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $4,274 was assessed for 8/23/17 surveillance findings
   • Federal CMPs in the amounts of $54,645 and $17,209 were assessed for 1/19/2017 surveillance
      f indings.

Torrington Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation (CT):
   • A f ederal CMP in the amount of $650 was issued on 1/3/2022

Program Review
No changes in the program or physical environment are proposed in this application. The applicant
states that it does plan to utilize staffing agencies and may utilize Five Star Staffing Inc. or any other
suitable staffing provider for its staffing needs in the future. The applicant indicates that the facility does
currently utilize P&G Insurance Brokers and the applicant plans to continue utilizing the services of P&G
Insurance brokers in the future.

Conclusion
The individual background review indicates the applicants have met the standard for approval as set forth
in Public Health Law §2801-a(3).




                                       Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 8
                                     Financial Analysis
Operating Budget
The applicant has provided the current year (2021) operations and an operating budget, in 2023 dollars,
f or the first and third years of operations after the change in ownership. The budget is summarized below:

                         Current Year                   Year One                     Year Three
                             2021                         2023                         2025
                   Per Diem        Total         Per Diem       Total         Per Diem        Total
 Revenues
 Medicaid-FFS        $203.33     $4,925,361        $203.32     $5,861,180        $203.33     $6,007,709
 Medicaid-MC         $177.04        343,465        $177.04        343,465        $177.00        352,052
 Medicare-FFS        $584.71      6,172,741        $584.70      7,345,561        $584.70      7,529,200
 Medicare-MC         $584.71        349,069        $585.06        415,393        $584.86        425,777
 Private Pay         $300.97        880,337        $300.95      1,047,601        $300.95      1,073,792
 All Other*                          44,377                        44,377                        44,377
 Total Revenue                  $12,715,350                   $15,057,577                   $15,432,907

 Expenses
 Operating           $162.81      $6,552,025       $224.33    $10,660,342        $222.33    $10,829,252
 Capital             $211.02       8,492,144        $89.34      4,245,366         $87.16      4,245,366
 Total Expense       $373.83     $15,044,169       $313.67    $14,905,708        $309.49    $15,074,618

 Oper Income                    ($2,328,819)                      $151,869                     $358,289

 Patient Days                          40,243                       47,521                        48,709
 Utilization (%)                      78.75%                       93.00%                        95.32%
 * Includes Investment income and vending machine revenues

Notes concerning the submitted RHCF operating budget follow:
 • The operating loss of ($2,328,819) is before considering $2,518,368 from the Medicare Relief Grant
    of $1,180,732 and Employee Retention Credit of $1,337,636, which brings Net Income to $189,549.
  • The current year ref lects the facility’s 2021 revenues and expenses.
  • Medicaid revenue is based on the facility’s current 2021 Medicaid Regional Pricing rate. The per
    diems for Medicaid Manage Care is the daily rate experienced by the facility during 2021.
  • The current year Medicare rate is the actual daily rate experienced by the facility during 2021. The
    f orecasted year one and year three Medicare rate is based on the average daily rate experienced
    during 2021. The f orecasted Private Pay rate is based on the average daily rate experienced during
    2021.
  • Projected expenses are based on the current operator’s 2021 costs, adjusted to include inflation and
    increased volume. The incremental cost consists primarily of increased labor costs related to hiring
    additional clinical, aides/orderlies, housekeeping, and food service staff (53.30 FTEs in year one) to
    accommodate the increased patient volume.
    o The projected percentage of direct care staffing costs to projected facility revenues is 40.39% in
         year one and year three, exceeding the 40% requirement in Public Health Law 2808.
    o The percentage of direct resident care costs to projected facility revenue is 70.75% in year one
         and 71.70% in year three, exceeding the 70% requirement in Public Health Law 2808.
    o The f acility’s projected profit percentage is forecasted to be 1.01% in year one and 2.32% in year
         three, less than the 5% maximum outlined in Public Health Law 2808.
 • The f acility’s projected utilization is 93% in year one and 95.32% in year three. Occupancy at 97.9%
    as of August 17, 2022, exceeds these projections and is a significant recovery from the pandemic
    impact when the utilization in the last three years averaged 63.9% and was 78.75% at year-end
    2021. The breakeven utilization is projected at 92.33% for the first year.



                                    Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 9
 • Current year staf fing is based on 2021 staffing levels and a 78.75% occupancy rate. Staffing in years
   one and three are based on a planned increase in utilization. The f acility currently has 96 FTEs.
   Additional staffing will be sourced from multiple area nursing staffing agencies.
 • Projected utilization by payor source for the first and third year after the change in ownership is:
                             Current Year           Year One              Year Three
                                 2021                  2023                   2025
       Payor                Days       %       Days           %        Days        %
       Medicaid -FFS 24,224 60.19% 28,827 60.66% 29,547 60.66%
       Medicaid-MC          1,940    4.82%      1,940       4.08%      1,989      4.08%
       Medicare-FFS 10,557 26.23% 12,563 26.44% 12,877 26.44%
       Medicare-MC            597    1.48%         710      1.49%         728     1.49%
       Private Pay          2,925    7.27%      3,481       7.33%      3,568      7.33%
       Total               40,243    100.% 47,521           100.% 48,709           100%


Stock Purchase Agreement (SPA)
The applicant submitted an executed SPA to acquire the operating entity’s corporate stock. The terms
are summarized below:

 Date:                November 30, 2018
 Operator:            Highland Nursing Home, Inc.
 Seller:              Lea Sherman, Jeffrey Goldstein, Alexander Sherman
 Buyers:              David Landa, Menajem (Mark) Salamon, or their designees
 Asset Acquired:      100% of the issued and outstanding corporate stock in Highland Nursing Home, Inc.
 Purchase Price:      $2,050,000
 Payment of           $300,000 * paid upon execution, held in escrow;
 Purchase Price:      $1,750,000 balance due at closing
*This amount was held in escrow, and all interest accrued thereon was refunded to the Buyers at the Real Estate
closing (May 31, 2019).

First Amendment to Stock Purchase Agreement:
The applicant submitted an executed First Amendment to assign David Landa and Menajem Salamon’s
rights under the original Agreement to ten new shareholders. The terms are summarized below:

 Date:                July 10, 2019
 Sellers:             Lea Sherman, Jeffrey Goldstein, Alexander Sherman
 Original Buyers:     David Landa and Menajem Salamon and their designees
 New Buyers:          Joseph Landa, (13.75%, 27.5 shares); Joshua Landa, (13.75%, 27.5 shares);
                      Menashe Eisen, (5%, 10 shares); Suri Reich, (5%, 10 shares); Yossi Mayer, (5%,
                      10 shares); Hellen Majerovic, (4.50%, 9 shares); Blimie Perlstein, (5%, 10 shares);
                      Mordejai Salamon, (17%, 34 shares); Menajem Salamon, (30%, 60 shares); Tirtza
                      Salamon, (1%, 2 shares).
 Provision:           Acquisition of stocks in Highland Nursing Home, Inc. The Original Buyers assign,
                      transf er, and release their right, title, and interest as Buyers under the Stock
                      Purchase Agreement dated November 30, 2018, to New Buyers.
 Price:               $1,863,461 (balance due on a $2,050,000 Promissory Note between Lea Sherman,
                      Jef frey Goldstein, and Alexander Sherman as borrowers and 182 Highland Road,
                      LLC as Lender)
 Payment of           $1,863,461 via assumption of a 10-year Promissory Note at 3% interest between
 Purchase Price:      the current shareholders (Sellers, Borrowers) and 182 Highland Road, LLC
                      (Lender)




                                       Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 10
Second Amendment to Stock Purchase Agreement:
The applicant submitted an executed Second Amendment whereby Menashe Eisen withdraws as Buyer.
David Landa will replace Menashe Eisen as one of the ten proposed shareholders of Highland Nursing
Home, Inc. The terms are summarized below:

 Date:                July 1, 2022
 Sellers:             Lea Sherman, Jeffrey Goldstein, Alexander Sherman
 Original Buyers:     David Landa and Menajem Salamon and their designees
 New Buyers:          Joseph Landa, (11%, 22 shares); Joshua Landa, (11%, 22 shares); David Landa,
                      (10.5%, 21 shares); Suri Reich, (5%, 10 shares); Yossi Mayer, (5%, 10 shares);
                      Hellen Majerovic, (4.50%, 9 shares); Blimie Perlstein, (5%, 10 shares); Mordejai
                      Salamon, (17%, 34 shares); Menajem Salamon, (30%, 60 shares); Tirtza Salamon,
                      (1%, 2 shares).

The $1,863,461 purchase price for the operations’ corporate stock will be satisfied by the assumption of
the balance due on a Promissory Note (original principal valued at $2,050,000) between Lea Sherman,
Jef frey Goldstein, and Alexander Sherman (Borrowers) and 182 Highland Road LLC (Lender). Sellers’
expenses of $416,640 related to the original SPA and Real Estate Contract were refunded at the Real
Estate closing. Per note seven in the 2021 certified financial statement, the $1,863,461 note balance will
be canceled upon the closing of the stock purchase agreement.

Original Real Estate Purchase Agreement:
The applicant submitted a copy of the original real property purchase agreement and original lease
agreement, the terms of which were summarized below:

 Date:                  June 23, 2016
 Seller:                Highland Nursing Home, Inc.
 Buyer:                 Highland Realty Co, LLC (proposed initially, rights later assigned)
 Asset Transferred:     Real property located at 182 Highland Road, Massena, NY 13662
 Purchase Price:        $4,950,000
 Payment of             $4,950,000 cash at closing
 Purchase Price:

Original Lease Agreement and First Amendment
The applicant has submitted an executed original lease agreement, and first amendment, the terms of
which were summarized below:

 Date:                August 10, 2016, and First Amended on December 4, 2018
 Premises:            140-bed RHCF located at 182 Highland Road, Massena, NY 13662
 Owner/Landlord:      Highland Realty Co., LLC (proposed initially, rights later assigned)
 Lessee:              Highland Nursing Home, Inc.
 Term:                30 years (amended to start with the closing of the Real Property Contract and
                      terminate 30 years later)
 Rent:                $360,000 plus annual debt repayment (principal + interest estimated at
                      $501,866 per year), totaling approx. $861,866 per year ($71,822 per month).
 Provisions:          Triple Net

On November 30, 2018, Highland Realty Co, LLC assigned its rights under the agreement for the sale of
real property dated June 23, 2016, and the facility’s lease agreement dated August 10, 2016, as
amended December 4, 2018, to 182 Highland Road, LLC.




                                    Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 11
Assignment of Agreement for sale of Real Property and Lease
The applicant has submitted an executed agreement for the assignment of the sale of real property
agreement and the facility’s lease agreement:

 Date:          November 30, 2018
 Assignor:      Highland Realty Co, LLC
 Assignee:      182 Highland Road, LLC
 Assignment:    Assignor assigns all its rights, title, and interest to and under the real property
                sale agreement and the lease.

The applicant confirms that the closing for the real property occurred on May 31, 2019. 182 Highland
Road LLC leases the facility to Highland Nursing Home, Inc. for a term of 30 years.

The purchase price of the real property was satisfied as follows:
 Equity – 182 Highland Road LLC Members                                                   $742,500
 Loan (M&T Bank, assumed outstanding realty loan debt, five years at 4% one-
 month Libor or 5.74%, (as of December 18, 2019) and one 5-year extension at
 5.50% plus one-month Libor, 25-year amortization)                                      $4,207,500
 Total                                                                                  $4,950,000

Second Amendment to Lease
The applicant has submitted an executed second amendment to the lease agreement, the terms of which
are summarized below:

 Date:         March 26, 2018
 Lessor        182 Highland Road, LLC
 Lessee:       Highland Nursing Home, Inc.
 Term:         30 years
 Rental:       $360,000 plus annual debt repayment obligations (principal + interest estimated
               at $501,866 per year), totaling approx. $861,866 per year ($71,822 per month).
 Provisions:   Triple Net

The lease arrangement is a non-arm’s length agreement. The applicant has submitted an affidavit
attesting to the relationship between the landlord and tenant.

Capability and Feasibility
The proposed new shareholders will acquire 100% of Highland Nursing Home, Inc.’s corporate stock for
$1,863,461, to be funded via a 10-year Promissory Note at a 3% interest rate (original principal of
$2,050,000) between the current shareholders (Borrowers) and 182 Highland Road, LLC (Lender). The
$1,863,461 Promissory note balance will be canceled upon the closing of the stock purchase agreement,
per note seven in the 2021 certified financial statement of Highland Nursing Home, Inc. 182 Highland
Road LLC is the current property owner and has leased the facility to Highland Nursing Home, Inc. for a
term of 30 years. There is a relationship between the proposed shareholders of Highland Nursing Home,
Inc. and the members of 182 Highland Road, LLC in that ownership is overlapping but not identical.
There are no project costs associated with this application.

The working capital requirement is estimated at $2,484,285, based on two months of Year One
expenses. Funding will be provided from the entity’s ongoing operations. BFA Attachment A is the net
worth summaries for the proposed Buyers of Highland Nursing Home, Inc.’s corporate stock, and
indicates they have sufficient resources to meet equity requirements. BFA Attachment C is Highland
Nursing Home, Inc.’s pro forma balance sheet, which shows the entity will start with $3,617,174 in equity.
Equity includes $1,359,817 in goodwill, which is not a liquid resource nor recognized for Medicaid
reimbursement. If goodwill were eliminated, the total net assets would become $2,257,357.

The submitted budget projects a net income of $151,869 and $358,289 in the first and third years.
Operating revenues are estimated to increase by approximately $2,342,227 from the Current Year to

                                    Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 12
Year One. This revenue increase is primarily from growing patient days and utilization to 93% in the first
year. Overall expenses are projected to decrease by $138,461 by the first year following the approval of
this project. Reductions in rent of $4,246,778 drive this decrease in overall expenses. However,
decreases in capital expenses are offset by an increase in operating expenses of $4,108,317. The budget
appears reasonable.

BFA Attachment D is a Financial Summary of Highland Nursing Home, Inc. for 2019 through 2021. The
RHCF had average positive working capital, average positive net assets, and average positive net
income. BFA Attachment E is the Internal Financials as of May 31, 2022, which show positive working
capital, net assets, and an operating profit of $1,702,680.

BFA Attachment F is the proposed members’ ownership interest in New York nursing homes. New York
State-affiliated nursing homes on a combined basis had average positive working capital, average
positive net assets, and average positive net income for the period from 2019 through 2021. In 2021
each af filiated nursing home maintains positive working capital, positive net assets, and positive net
income.

Conclusion
Based on the preceding, the applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a f inancially feasible
manner.



                                         Attachments
 LTCOP Attachment        Long Term Care Ombudsman Program Recommendation
 BFA Attachment A        Highland Nursing Home, Inc. - Proposed Stockholders’ Net Worth
 BFA Attachment B        Current Owners of the Real Property
 BFA Attachment C        Pro Forma Balance Sheet
 BFA Attachment D        2019-2021 Financial Summary of Highland Nursing Home, Inc and 2021
                         certif ied financial statement.
 BFA Attachment E        Internal Financials Highland Nursing Home, Inc. May 31, 2022.
 BFA Attachment F        Proposed members’ ownership interest in Affiliated RHCFs




                                    Project #192204-E Exhibit Page 13
                                          RESOLUTION


                RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
transfer 100 percent shareholder interest to ten new shareholders, and with the contingencies, if
any, as set forth below and providing that each applicant fulfills the contingencies and
conditions, if any, specified with reference to the application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                192204 E                 Highland Nursing Home, Inc. d/b/a North
                                         County Nursing & Rehabilitation Center
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of a photocopy of the Certificate of Assumed Name, acceptable to the
   Department. [CSL]
2. Submission of a photocopy of a list of the Board of Directors, acceptable to the Department.
   [CSL]
3. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Resolution of the Board of Directors, acceptable
   to the Department. [CSL]
4. Submission of a photocopy of executed Shareholder Stock Certificates, acceptable to the
   Department. [CSL]
5. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to the
   Department. [CSL]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by June 1, 2023, including all pre-opening processes, if
   applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an abandonment of the
   project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility of the
   applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date.
    [PMU]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                               Public Health and Health
                                                  Planning Council
                     Project # 202034-E
              Ulster NH Operations LLC d/b/a
      Golden Hill Center for Rehabilitating and Nursing
Program:      Residential Health Care Facility              County:       Ulster
Purpose:      Establishment                                 Acknowledged: August 18, 2020


                                      Executive Summary

  Description                                             Ownership of the RHCF before and after the
  Ulster NH Operation, LLC, an existing limited           requested change is as follows:
  liability company, requests approval to be
  established as the new operator of Golden Hill                             Current
  Nursing and Rehabilitation Center, a 280-bed                Golden Hill Planning Corporation, Inc.
  residential health care facility (RHCF) at 99             Orly Lieberman                      9.54%
  Golden Hill Drive, Kingston (Ulster County).              Tibor Lebovich                    28.10%
                                                            Alex Berger                         8.33%
  Golden Hill Planning Corporation, Inc. is the             Edward Farbenblum                 44.13%
  current operator of the facility. Pursuant to the         Solomon Klein                       9.90%
  Asset Purchase Agreement (APA) dated
  November 22, 2019, Ulster NH Operation, LLC                                Proposed
  agreed to purchase the RHCF from Golden Hill                      Ulster NH Operation, LLC
  Planning Corporation, Inc for $3,000,000 plus             CW Kingston Operating, LLC       48.50%
  assumption of liabilities. Upon approval, the                Chava Wolofsky (100%)
  f acility will be named Golden Hill Center for            KF Kingston Operating, LLC       17.00%
  Rehabilitation and Nursing.                                  Solomon Klein (100%)
                                                            ES Kingston Operating, LLC       17.00%
  On November 22, 2019, Ulster NH Realty, LLC                  Ernest Schlesinger (100%)
  and Golden Hill Acquisition, LLC entered into a           ED Kingston Operating, LLC        9.50%
  Contract of Sale for the real estate whereby                 Ezriel Drebin (100%)
  Ulster NH Realty, LLC agreed to purchase the              SE Kingston Operating, LLC        8.00%
  real estate associated with the facility. Upon               Shoshana Markovitz (100%)
  approval of this application, Ulster NH Realty,
  LLC will lease the RHCF to Ulster NH Operation,         OPCHSM/OALTC Recommendation
  LLC f or a term of 40 years.                            Contingent Approval




                                       Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 1
Need Summary                                          Financial Summary
There will be no changes to beds or services as       The purchase price for the operation is
a result of this application. Occupancy as of         $3,000,000 to be met via equity from the
July 27, 2022, was 86.1% for the facility and         proposed members. The purchase price for the
82.8% f or Ulster County.                             real estate is $37,600,000 to be met via equity of
                                                      $3,008,000 f rom the proposed members of the
Program Summary                                       realty entity and a loan of $34,592,000 at an
The individual background review indicates the        interest rate of 6% for a 30-year term.
proposed members have met the standard for
approval as set forth in Public Health Law            The submitted budget indicates a projected net
§2801-a(3).                                           income of $1,555,859 and $1,683,131 in the first
                                                      and third years of operations, respectively.

                                                                        Year One       Year Three
                                                        Revenues       $33,759,867     $34,502,563
                                                        Expenses        32,204,008      32,819,432
                                                        Net Income      $1,555,859      $1,683,131




                                   Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 2
                                     Recommendations


Long Term Care Ombudsman Program
The LTCOP recommends Approval. (See LTCOP Attachment A)

Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of a loan commitment for the real estate, that is acceptable to the Department of Health.
    [BFA]
2. Submission of an executed lease agreement, that is acceptable to the Department of Health. [BFA]
3. Submission of an executed asset purchase agreement that is acceptable to the Department of
    Health. [BFA]
4. Submission of a commitment signed by the applicant which indicates that, within two years from the
    date of the council approval, the percentage of all admissions who are Medicaid and
    Medicare/Medicaid eligible at the time of admission will be at least 75 percent of the planning area
    average of all Medicaid and Medicare/Medicaid admissions, subject to possible adjustment based on
    f actors such as the number of Medicaid patient days, the facility’s case mix, the length of time before
    private paying patients became Medicaid eligible, and the financial impact on the facility due to an
    increase in Medicaid admissions. [RNR]
5. Submission of a photocopy of the Certificate of Assumed Name, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
6. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Administrative Services Agreement,
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
8. Submission of a photocopy of the Application for Authority for CW Kingston Operations LLC,
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
9. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for CW Kingston
    Operations LLC, acceptable to the Department. [(CSL]
10. Submission of a photocopy of the Application for Authority for ED Kingston Operations LLC,
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
11. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for ED Kingston
    Operations LL, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
12. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization for KF Kingston
    Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
13. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for KF Kingston
    Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
14. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization for ES Kingston
    Operations LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
15. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for ES Kingston
    Operations LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
16. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization for SE Kingston
    Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
17. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for SE Kingston
    Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
18. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
19. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Partial Assignment of Membership
    Interests, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]




                                     Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 3
Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of the recommendation letter, including
   all pre-opening processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute
   an abandonment of the project by the applicant and an expiration of the approval. It is the
   responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any extension to the project approval
   expiration date. [PMU]


Council Action Date
December 8, 2022




                                   Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 4
                                                   Need Analysis
Project Description
Ulster NH Operation LLC is requesting approval to become the established operator of Golden Hill
Nursing & Rehabilitation Center, a 280-bed Article 28 residential health care facility (RHCF) located at 99
Golden Hill Drive, Kingston, 12401 in Ulster County.

Analysis

                                    Golden Hill Nursing & Rehabilitation Center
                                                vs. Ulster County
                               100.0%

                                95.0%
              Occupancy Rate




                                90.0%

                                85.0%

                                80.0%

                                75.0%

                                70.0%
                                        2016           2017        2018       2019    2020    2021
           Golden Hill Nursing          78.5%         78.3%       83.9%       93.3%   90.2%   79.7%
           Ulster County                85.6%         86.2%       90.3%       92.0%   86.0%   78.8%
           Planning Optimum             97.0%         97.0%       97.0%       97.0%   97.0%   97.0%


Occupancy, as of September 21, 2022, was 88.9% for the facility and 85.5% for Ulster County.

Medicaid Access
To ensure that the Residential Health Care Facility needs of the Medicaid population are met, 10 NYCRR
§670.3 requires applicants to accept and admit a reasonable percentage of Medicaid residents in their
service area. The benchmark is 75% of the annual percentage of residential health care facility
admissions that are Medicaid-eligible individuals in their planning area. This benchmark may be
increased or decreased based on the following factors:
    • the number of individuals within the planning area currently awaiting placement to a residential
        health care f acility and the proportion of total individuals awaiting such placement that are
        Medicaid patients and/or alternate level of care patients in general hospitals;
    • the proportion of the facility's total patient days that are Medicaid patient days and the length of
        time that the f acility's patients who are admitted as private paying patients remain such before
        becoming Medicaid eligible;
    • the proportion of the facility's admissions who are Medicare patients or patients whose services
        are paid for under provisions of the federal Veterans' Benefit Law;
    • the f acility's patient case mix based on the intensity of care required by the facility's patients or
        the extent to which the facility provides services to patients with unique or specialized needs;
    • the f inancial impact on the facility due to an increase in Medicaid patient admissions.
An applicant will be required to make appropriate adjustments in its admission policies and practices to
meet the resultant percentage. The f acility’s Medicaid admissions rate was above the threshold of 75%
of the Ulster County rate.

                                                Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 5
 Medicaid Access                       2019      2020        2021
 Ulster County Total                   27.1%     21.6%       22.7%
   Ulster Threshold Value              20.3%     16.2%       17.0%
   Golden Hill Nursing                 34.1%     27.3%       26.9%

Conclusion
There will be no changes to beds or services as a result of this project. Based upon weekly census data,
current occupancy, as of July 27, 2022, was 86.1% for the facility and 82.8% for Ulster County.



                                    Program Analysis
Facility Information
                   Existing                                   Proposed
 Facility Name     Golden Hill Nursing and Rehabilitation     Golden Hill Center for Rehabilitating and
                   Center                                     Nursing
 Address           99 Golden Hill Drive                       Same
                   Kingston, NY 12401
 RHCF Capacity     280                                        Same
 ADHCP Capacity N/A                                           Same
 Type of Operator  Business Corporation                       Limited Liability Company
 Class of Operator Proprietary                                Proprietary
 Operator          Golden Hill Planning Corporation, Inc.     Ulster NH Operation, LLC
                   Shareholders                               Members
                   Solomon Klein             9.90%            CW Kingston Operating, LLC 48.5%
                   Orly Lieberman            9.54%               Chava Wolofsky (100%)
                   Tibor Lebovich           28.10%            KF Kingston Operating, LLC   17.0%
                   Alex Berger               8.33%               Solomon Klein* (100%)
                   Edward Farbenblum        44.13%            ES Kingston Operating, LLC   17.0%
                                                                 Ernest Schlesinger (100%)
                                                              ED Kingston Operating, LLC    9.5%
                                                                 Ezriel Drebin (100%)
                                                              SE Kingston Operating, LLC    8.0%
                                                                 Shoshana Markovitz (100%)

                                                              *Managing Member

No changes in the program or physical environment are proposed in this application.

Character and Competence
Experience
Chava Wolofsky indicates no employment history for the last ten years. Chava Wolofsky has a diploma
f rom Bais Yaakov Academy and discloses the following interests in health care facilities.

    Out-of -State Nursing Homes
    Alaska Gardens Health and Rehabilitation (19.70%) [WA]                       01/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Ocala (17.5%) [FL]        08/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Brandon (17.5%) [FL]      08/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Sarasota (17.5%) [FL]     08/2021 to present
    Forest Hill Center Health Care (19%) [NJ]                                              Pending
    The Place at Pepper Hill 22.75% [SC]                                                   Pending
    Solaris Healthcare Lake Bennet (19%) [FL]                                              Pending
    Solaris Healthcare Palatka (19%) [FL]                                                  Pending

                                   Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 6
    Out-of -State Independent Living Facilities
    Hawthorne Estates of Ocala (17.50%) [FL]                                     04/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Estates of Brandon (17.5%) [FL]                                              Pending

    Out-of -State Assisted Living Facilities
    Hawthorne Inn of Brandon (17.50%) [FL]                                       08/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Inn of Lakeland (17.50%) [FL]                                      08/2021 to present

Solomon Klein indicates current employment at Sightrite an eyecare business since February 2013.
Solomon Klein has an associate degree from Touro College and discloses the following interests in health
care f acilities:

    Nursing Homes
    Ten Broeck Center for Rehabilitation & Nursing (10%) [NY]                    10/2018 to present
    Clove Lakes Healthcare and Rehabilitation Center (9.9%) [NY]                 02/2020 to present
    Golden Hill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center (9.9%) [NY]                    09/2020 to present

    Out-of -State Nursing Homes
    TimberRidge Center for Rehab & Healing (28.5%) [FL]                          09/2019 to present
    Century Health & Rehabilitation Center (25%) [FL]                            03/2020 to present
    Northbrook Center for Rehabilitation and Healing (25%) [FL]                  03/2020 to present
    Santa Rosa Center for Rehabilitation and Healing (25%) [FL]                  03/2020 to present
    Ybor City Healthcare & Rehabilitation (25%) [FL]                             03/2020 to present
    Sandy Ridge Health & Rehabilitation (25%) [FL]                               03/2020 to present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Ocala (41%) [FL]          04/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Brandon (44%) [FL]        08/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Sarasota (44%) [FL]       08/2021 to present
    The Place at Pepper Hill (45%) [SC]                                                    Pending
    Solaris Healthcare Lake Bennet (57%) [FL]                                              Pending
    Solaris Healthcare Palatka (57%) [FL]                                                  Pending
    Forest Hill Center Rehabilitation and Healing (43%) [NJ]                               Pending

    End Dated Ownership
    Abbey Woods Center for Rehab & Healing (6%) [MO]                             04/2017 to 6/2019

    Out-of -State Independent Living Facilities
    Hawthorne Estates of Ocala (44%) [FL]                                        07/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Estates of Brandon (44%) [FL]                                      07/2021 to present

    Out-of -State Assisted Living Facilities
    Hawthorne Inn of Ocala (41%) [FL]                                            04/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Inn of Brandon (44%) [FL]                                          08/2021 to present
    Hawthorne Inn of Lakeland (44%) [FL]                                         08/2021 to present

Ernest Schlesinger discloses employment as the Chief Executive Officer of Sightrite, an eyecare
business since January 2013. Ernest Schlesinger has a diploma from Yeshiva Taras Chesed and
discloses the following health facility interests:

    Nursing Homes
    Dumont Center for Rehabilitation and Nursing Care (2.5%) [NY]                07/2010 to present
    St James Rehabilitation & Healthcare Center (10%) [NY]                       08/2012 to present
    Bellhaven Center for Rehabilitation & Nursing Care (5%) [NY]                 03/2010 to present
    The Grand Pavilion at Rockville Centre (5%) [NY]                             08/2012 to present
    Westhampton Care Center (17%) [NY]                                           02/2018 to present
    Ten Broeck Center for Rehabilitation & Nursing (13%) [NY]                    10/2018 to present

    Out-of -State Nursing Homes

                                     Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 7
    Big Bend Woods Healthcare Center (10%) [MO]                                       01/2016 to present
    Washington Square Healthcare Center (6%) [OH]                                     01/2014 to present
    Greenery Center for Rehab and Nursing (15%) [PA]                                  06/2016 to present
    TimberRidge Center for Rehab & Healing (13%) [FL]                                 09/2019 to present

    End Dated Ownership
    Abbey Woods Center for Rehabilitation and Healing (50%) [MO]                     04/2017 to 06/2019

Ezriel Drebin indicates self-employment in healthcare management and acquisitions. The applicant also
indicates the position of Director of Operations at Inf inite Care since September 2019. Ezriel Drebin has a
diploma from Yeshiva Gedolah Toronto and discloses the following health facility ownership interests:

    Out-of -State Nursing Homes
    Century Center Health & Rehabilitation Center (8%) [FL]                           03/2019 to Present
    Northbrook Health & Rehabilitation (8%) [FL]                                      03/2019 to Present
    Santa Rosa Health & Rehabilitation Center (8%) [FL]                               03/2019 to Present
    Ybor City Healthcare & Rehabilitation (8%) [FL]                                   03/2019 to Present
    Sandy Ridge Health & Rehabilitation (8%) [FL]                                     03/2019 to Present
    TimberRidge Center for Rehab & Healing (10%) [FL]                                 09/2019 to Present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Ocala 5% [FL]                  04/2021 to Present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Brandon 2% [FL]                07/2021 to Present
    Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Sarasota 2% [FL]               07/2021 to Present
    Forest Hill Center for Rehabilitation and Healing (3%) [NJ]                                 Pending

    Out-of -State Independent Living Facilities
    Hawthorne Estates of Brandon 2% [FL]                                              07/2021 to Present
    Hawthorne Estates of Ocala 2% [FL]                                                          Pending

    Out-of -State Assisted Living Facilities
    Hawthorne Inn of Ocala 5% [FL]                                                    04/2021 to Present
    Hawthorne Inn of Brandon 2% [FL]                                                  07/2021 to Present
    Hawthorne Inn of Lakeland 2% [FL]                                                 07/2021 to Present

Shoshana Markovitz is licensed as a Registered Nurse License in New Jersey. The applicant discloses
employment as Registered Nurse and VFC (Vaccine for Children) Coordinator at Dr. Neil Gittleman
located in Lakewood, NJ since 2/2018. Shoshana Markovitz has an M.S.N in Pediatric Primary Care
Nurse Practitioner from Seton Hall University School of Nursing and a master’s in science and Nursing
f rom John Hopkins University. Shoshana Markovitz discloses no health facility ownership interests.

Quality Review
The proposed owners have been evaluated, in part, on the distribution of CMS Star ratings for their
portfolios. For all proposed owners the distribution of CMS star ratings for their facilities meet the standard
described in state regulations.

                           CMS Star Rating Criteria - 10 NYCRR 600.2(b)(5)(iv)
                                                          Duration of Ownership
                                             < 48 Months                   48 months or more
                                                       Percent of                    Percent of
                            Total    Number of Nursing Homes Number of Nursing Homes
                           Nursing    Nursing         with a Below     Nursing     with a Below
 Proposed Owner            Homes       Homes        Average Rating      Homes     Average Rating
 Chava Wolofsky               4           4               75%              0             n/a
 Ernest Schlesinger          10           1                 0              9            22%
 Ezriel Drebin                9           9              44.44%            0             n/a
 Solomon Klein               12          11              45.45%            1              0
 Shoshana Markovitz           0          n/a               n/a           n/a             n/a
Duration of Ownership as of 12/8/2022

                                        Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 8
Data as of 09/2022

The CMS Special Focus Facility (SFF) program includes nursing homes that have a history of serious
quality issues or are included in a special program to stimulate improvements in their quality of care.

New York: The proposed owner’s portfolio includes ownership in eight New York facilities. Seven of the
New York f acilities in the ownership portfolio have CMS overall quality ratings of average or higher. The
remaining f acility, Golden Hill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center, has a CMS overall quality rating of
below average or lower. When asked to explain the low overall CMS ratings for Golden Hill Nursing and
Rehabilitation Center the applicants indicated the following:
    The two-star rating in the Overall category was due primarily to the fact that the facility’s staffing
    rating went from two stars to one star. Since the COVID-19 pandemic began, the facility has
    experienced difficulties in hiring and retaining qualified Registered Nurses. As a result, the facility has
    hired Licensed Practical Nurses in order to provide the best possible nursing coverage to its residents
    despite these difficult circumstances in the labor market.

Florida: The proposed owner’s portfolio includes ownership in nine Florida facilities. Five of the Florida
f acilities have CMS overall quality ratings of average or higher. The remaining four Florida facilities have
CMS overall quality ratings of below average or lower. When asked to explain the low overall CMS ratings
f or the four facilities (Santa Rosa Center for Rehabilitation and Healing, Hawthorne Center for
Rehabilitation and Healing of Brandon, Northbrook Center for Rehabilitation & Healing, and Hawthorne
Center f or Rehabilitation and Healing of Sarasota) the applicants indicated the following:
      Prior to Ezriel Drebin and Solomon Klein becoming members of Santa Rosa Center for Rehabilitation
      and Healing in March of 2020, the facility received an Immediate Jeopardy (IJ) violation. This violation
      has since been remedied by the facility, but the violation is still impacting the facility’s Overall Star
      Rating. It is expected that the facility’s Overall Rating will improve within the near term, as this
      violation ages and has a lesser impact on scoring.

    The low rating at Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Brandon was a result of a
    survey conducted on February 17, 2022, the facility received a G-level violation, along with three (3)
    IJ violations: F600 (Free from Abuse and Neglect); F609 (Reporting of Alleged Violations); and F610
    (Investigate / Prevent / Correct Alleged Violation). Although three (3) IJ violations were received,
    these violations all related to one (1) incident and one (1) resident. All three (3) of these IJ violations
    have since been removed and the facility’s Plan of Correction has been approved. Due to the above
    citation for resident harm or potential harm for abuse or neglect at Hawthorne Center for
    Rehabilitation and Healing of Brandon, CMS has indicated on the facility profile an icon of a red circle
    with a hand in it on the Nursing Home Compare website. Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and
    Healing of Brandon is also designated by CMS as a Special Focus Facility Candidate, which is a
    program that includes nursing homes that have a history of serious quality issues or are included in a
    special program to stimulate improvements in their quality of care.

    The applicant states that the reason for the low star rating (2 stars in the Overall category) at
    Northbrook Center for Rehabilitation & Healing was due to two (2) Immediate Jeopardy (IJ)
    deficiencies that were received by the facility on April 13, 2022. These deficiencies have since been
    corrected and the fines associated with these deficiencies have also been paid. As such, it is
    expected that the facility’s Overall star rating will increase to three (3) stars within the near term.

    The applicant states the reason for the low overall star rating at Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation
    and Healing of Ocala is the facility’s staffing rating was adjusted from two (2) stars down to one (1)
    star. This is a result of a recent Payroll Based Journal report submission that contained an error that
    resulted in CMS reducing the facility’s staffing rating to one (1) star for a period of six months. The
    facility has corrected this error and expects the overall staffing rating to return to three (3) stars in the
    overall category.

Missouri: The proposed owner’s portfolio includes ownership in one Missouri facility. When asked to
explain the low overall CMS rating at Big Bend Woods, the applicant indicated:
   The rules in Missouri regarding whether a member has control of a facility are different than those in
   New York State. As such, although Ernest Schlesinger is a 10% member of this facility, he indicates
                                      Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 9
    that he does not exercise control over the day-to-day operations of the facility. This facility is
    designated by CMA as a Special Focus Facility Candidate, which is a program that includes nursing
    homes that have a history of serious quality issues or are included in a special program to stimulate
    improvements in their quality of care.

Ohio: The proposed owner’s portfolio includes ownership in one Ohio facility. The Ohio facility currently
has a CMS overall quality rating of average or higher.

Pennsylvania: The proposed owner’s portfolio includes ownership in one Pennsylvania facility. The
Pennsylvania facility currently has a CMS overall quality rating of below average or lower. When asked to
explain the low overall CMS rating at The Greenery the applicant indicated:
   The rules in Pennsylvania regarding whether a member has control of a facility are different than
   those in New York State. As such, although Ernest Schlesinger is a 15% member of this facility, he
   indicates that he does not exercise control over the day-to-day operations of the facility.

Washington: The proposed owner’s portfolios include ownership in one Washington facility. The
Washington facility currently has a CMS overall quality rating of below average. When asked to explain
the low overall CMS rating at Alaska Gardens Health and Rehabilitation, the applicant indicated:
     Staffing has been an issue. The facility has hired a recruiter, contracted with several staffing
     agencies, and increased their presence on internet job boards related to open positions. Regarding
     the low health inspection rating, the facility attributes this to several deficiencies that were cited during
     surveys conducted at the facility in prior years. However, recent surveys conducted during 2022 have
     resulted in fewer deficiencies than in prior years. The applicant states that this reflects the facility's
     focus on improvement in this area and expects the health inspection rating will increase to three stars
     in the near term.

CMS Star Ratings
Currently Owned Nursing Homes
                            Ownership                                   Health       Quality
Facility                      Since                     Overall       Inspection     Measure        Staffing
New York
                                       Subject
Golden Hill Nursing and                Facility           **              ***          ****              *
Rehabilitation Center
                                       09/2020          *****            ****         *****             **
Dumont Center for                      Current          *****           *****         *****            ***
Rehabilitation and Nursing             07/2010
Care                                  Data as of           *               *            ***            ***
                                       11/2010

The Grand Pavilion at                  Current          *****            ****         *****             **
Rockville Centre                       08/2012             **              **           ***             **
Westhampton Care Center
                                       Current            ***             ***         *****              *
                                       02/2018           ****             ***         *****            ***
St James Rehabilitation &              Current          *****            ****         *****             **
Healthcare Center                      08/2012             **             ***          ****              *
Bellhaven Center f or                  Current            ***             ***          ****             **
Rehabilitation & Nursing Care          03/2010              *              **           ***              *
Ten Broeck Center for                  Current            ***             ***         *****              *
Rehabilitation & Nursing               10/2018          *****            ****         *****             **
                                      Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 10
                                Ownership                     Health     Quality
Facility                          Since         Overall     Inspection   Measure   Staffing
Clove Lakes Healthcare and       Current         ***           ****       ****        *
Rehabilitation Center            02/2020        *****         *****       ****       ***
Florida

Hawthorne Center f or Rehab &    Current          ***           ***        ***      ****
Healing of Sarasota              08/2021          ***            **         **      ****
Hawthorne Center f or            Current            *             *       ****       ***
Rehabilitation and Healing of
Brandon †                        08/2021           **             *       ****     *****
Hawthorne Center f or
Rehabilitation and Healing of
                                 Current           **           ***       ****        *
Ocala                            04/2021         ****            **      *****      ****
Century Center f or              Current         ****          ****        ***      ****
Rehabilitation and Healing       03/2020         ****           ***         **      ****
Northbrook Center for            Current           **            **       ****      ****
Rehabilitation & Healing         03/2020        *****           ***      *****      ****
Sandy Ridge Center for           Current        *****         *****        ***      ****
Rehabilitation and Healing       03/2020         ****          ****        ***      ****
TimberRidge Center for Rehab     Current         ****          ****         **      ****
& Healing
                                 09/2019          ***          ****        ***        *
Santa Rosa Center for            Current            *             *       ****      ****
Rehabilitation and Healing       03/2020         ****           ***        ***      ****
Ybor City Healthcare &           Current         ****          ****       ****       ***
Rehabilitation Center            03/2020         ****          ****       ****      ****
Missouri

Big Bend Woods Healthcare        Current           *                *      ***        *
Center †                         01/2016           *                *     ****       ***
Ohio

Washington Square Healthcare     Current         ****         *****       ****        *
Center                           01/2014          **            **        ****       ***




                                Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 11
                                     Ownership                     Health     Quality
Facility                               Since         Overall     Inspection   Measure      Staffing
Pennsylvania

Greenery Center f or Rehab            Current          **            **        ****           **
and Nursing                           06/2016           *             *          *             *
Washington

Alaska Gardens Health and             Current           *            **         ***            *
Rehabilitation                        01/2021          **            **        ****           ***
Data date: 09/2022
† Special Focus Facility Candidate

End-Dated Nursing Homes
                                     Ownership                     Health     Quality
Facility                               Since         Overall     Inspection   Measure      Staffing
Missouri

Abbey Woods Center for                 06/2019          *             *          **            *
Rehabilitation and Healing             04/2017         ***           **          **          ****
Enforcement History
Clove Lakes Healthcare and Rehabilitation Center, NY:
   • The f acility was fined $2,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH-21-104 issued on June 2,
       2021, f or surveillance findings on February 24, 2021. A federal CMP in the amount of $5,000 was
       also assessed on 2/24/2021. The f acility failed to establish and maintain an Inf ection Control
       Program to ensure the health and safety of residents to help prevent the transmission of COVID.
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $650.00 on 9/11/2021 for failure to report COVID
       data.

Golden Hill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center, NY:
   • The f acility was fined $2,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH-21-234 issued on 12/16/2021,
      f or surveillance findings on August 31, 2021. Deficiencies were found under Quality of Care.
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $655.14 on 1/4/2021 for failure to report COVID data.
Westhampton Care Center, NY:
   • The f acility was fined $14,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH-22-116 f or surveillance
      f indings on January 18, 2022, under 10 NYCRR 415.19(a)(1)(2) Inf ection Control and 10 NYCRR
      415.12 (H)(2) Quality of Care. A federal CMP in the amount of $11,435.00 was also assessed on
      1/18/2022. The f acility failed to establish and maintain an infection control program designed to
      provide a safe, sanitary, and comfortable environment in which residents reside and to help
      prevent the development and transmission of disease and infection. The f acility also failed to
      provide the necessary care and services to attain or maintain the highest practicable physical,
      mental and psychosocial well-being, in accordance with the comprehensive assessment and plan
      of care subject to the resident's right of self-determination.
   • The f acility was fined $10,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH-19-003 issued on January 3,
      2019, f or surveillance findings on September 10, 2018. A federal CMP in the amount of $7,036
      was also assessed on 9/10/2018. The f acility failed to develop and implement written policies and
      procedures that prohibit mistreatment, neglect, or abuse of residents, and misappropriation of
      resident property.

Sandy Ridge Health & Rehabilitation:
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMPs of $650.00 on 8/3/2020, $975.00 on 10/12/2020,
      $1300.00 on 10/19/2020, and $1625.00 on 10/26/2020 for failure to report COVID data.


                                     Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 12
Northbrook Center for Rehabilitation and Healing:
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMPs of $650.00 on 12/28/2020 and $975.00 on 01/10/2022
       f or f ailure to report COVID data.
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $13,490.00 on 4/13/2022 from two J level
       def iciencies related to prevention of abuse and neglect (F600) and Cardio-Pulmonary
       Resuscitation (CPR) (F678).

TimberRidge Center for Rehab & Healing:
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $20,635 on 4/3/2020 for failure to ensure that a
      nursing home area is free from accident hazards and provides adequate supervision to prevent
      accidents.
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMPs of $655.00 on 5/10/2021 for failure to report COVID data.

Century Health & Rehabilitation Center:
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMPs of $650.00 on 6/21/2021 for failure to report COVID data.

Hawthorne Center for Rehabilitation and Healing of Brandon:
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $359,085.00 on 12/10/2021 from a G level deficiency
      and three IJ level deficiencies related to prevention of abuse and neglect (F600), reporting of
      abuse (F609), and investigation of abuse (F610).
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMPs of $650.00 on 1/11/2021, $983.00 on 1/18/2021,
      $1,300.00 on 6/28/2021, $1,625.00 on 7/5/2021, and $1,950 on 8/16/2021 for failure to report
      COVID data.

Big Bend Woods Healthcare Center:
    • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $84,240 on 5/24/2021 the facility must provide
       appropriate pressure ulcer care and prevent new ulcers from developing.
    • On 5/24/2021 the f acility was cited for failure to provide appropriate treatment and care according
       to orders, resident’s preferences, and goals Federal Tag 684 at a G level.
    • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $44,782 on 1/4/2021 the facility must provide
       appropriate treatment and care according to orders, resident’s preferences, and goals.
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMPs of $655.00 on 6/7/2021, $983.00 on 6/21/2021,
       $1300.00 on 6/28/2021, and $1625.00 on 7/5/2021 for f ailure to report COVID data.
    • On 3/18/2020 Big Bend Woods Healthcare Center was cited for failure to provide basic life
       support, including CPR, prior to the arrival of emergency medical personnel, subject to physician
       orders and the resident’s advance directives Federal Tag 678 at a J level.
    • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $19,910 on 1/28/2020 the facility must provide
       appropriate treatment and care according to orders, resident’s preferences, and goals.
    • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $11,443 on 3/3/2017 the facility must give residents
       proper treatment to prevent new bed (pressure) sores or heal existing bed sores.

Greenery Center for Rehab and Nursing:
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $27,688.00 on 9/27/2019 the facility must ensure that
      a nursing home area is free from accident hazards and provides adequate supervision to prevent
      accidents.
   • On 9/27/2019, the f acility was cited for failure to provide appropriate treatment and care
      according to orders, residents’ preferences, and goals. Federal Tag 684 at a G level.

Bellhaven Center for Rehabilitation and Nursing Care:
    • The f acility was fined $2,000.00 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH-22-066 issued for
       surveillance findings on October 19, 2021, under 10 NYCRR 415.19(a) Inf ection Control. The
       f acility was also assessed a federal CMP of $5,000.00 on 10/19/2021 for failure to establish and
       maintain an inf ection prevention and control program to provide a safe, sanitary, and comfortable
       environment and to help prevent the development and transmission of communicable diseases
       and inf ections.


                                   Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 13
    •   The f acility was assessed federal CMPs of $650.00 on 3/22/2021, $975.00 on 6/14/2021,
        $1300.00 on 6/28/2021, $1300.00 on 6/28/2021, $1625.00 on 8/23/2021, $1,950.00 on
        9/13/2021, $2,275.00 on 9/20/2021, $4,000.00 on 11/15/2021, and $5000.00 on 11/29/2021 for
        f ailure to report National Health Safety data.

Conclusion
All health care f acilities are in substantial compliance with all rules and regulations. The individual
background review indicates the applicants have met the standard for approval as set forth in Public
Health Law §2801-a(3).



                                      Financial Analysis
Operating Budget
The applicant has submitted an operating budget, in 2022 dollars, during the first and third year:

                            Current Year                   Year One                    Year Three
                                2021                         2023                        2025
                        Per PD       Total           Per PD       Total           Per PD       Total
 Revenues
 Medicare FFS           $562.24      $8,000,658      $562.22      $9,200,756      $562.22       $9,403,173
 Medicare MC            $562.24       1,468,005      $562.17        1,688,206     $562.19        1,725,347
 Medicaid FFS           $263.92      13,643,397      $263.92       15,689,906     $263.92       16,035,084
 Medicaid MC            $263.92       1,786,481      $263.93        2,054,454      263.91        2,099,652
 Private Pay            $726.96       4,456,996      $726.92        5,125,545     $726.94        5,238,307
 Cares Act Rev                        1,576,550                             0                            0
 Misc. Rev                                  965                         1,000                        1,000
 Total Revenues                     $30,933,052                   $33,759,867                  $34,502,563

 Expenses
 Operating              $313.25     $25,510,075      $293.52      $27,488,856     $293.63      $28,104,280
 Capital                 $57.90       4,715,152       $50.35        4,715,152      $49.26        4,715,152
 Total Expenses         $371.15     $30,225,227      $343.87       32,204,008     $342.90      $32,819,432

 Net Income                          $707,825                      $1,555,859                   $1,683,131

 Utilization (Days)                        81,436                       93,651                        95,712
 Occupancy                                79.68%                       91.64%                        93.65%

The f ollowing is noted with respect to the submitted budget:
   • The Medicare and Private Pay rates are projected from the current market rates.
   • The current year's Medicaid rate is based on the facility’s Medicaid rate per 2019 RHCF-4 cost
         report information.
   • The current occupancy rate of Golden Hill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center was 85.4% as of
         August 17, 2022, as tracked in the New York State Health Commerce System. The applicant has
         indicated that the projected increase in patient days and recovery to exceed pre-pandemic
         utilization will result from the applicant’s plan to continue effectively marketing the facility to
         prospective residents. The f acility’s marketing campaign will continue to focus on communication
         and relationship building with the area doctors, hospitals, and resident family members regarding
         improvements being made at the facility. In addition, the applicant plans to invest further in the
         f acility by upgrading and beautifying resident rooms, as well as the gymnasium and resident
         dining rooms.




                                    Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 14
Utilization detailed by payor source for the current year, year one, and year three are as follows:

                               Current Year Year One Year Three
   Payor                          2021        2023     2025
   Medicare FFS                     17.47%   17.47%     17.47%
   Medicare Managed Care             3.21%     3.21%     3.21%
   Medicaid FFS                     63.48%   63.48%     63.48%
   Medicaid Managed Care             8.31%     8.31%     8.31%
   Private Pay                       7.53%     7.53%     7.53%
   Total                           100.00% 100.00%     100.00%

Asset Purchase Agreement
The applicant has submitted a draft asset purchase agreement for the purchase of the operation:

 Purpose                 Seller desires to sell, and Buyer desires to purchase, certain assets of Seller
                         relating to the Facility.
 Purchaser               Ulster NH Operation, LLC
 Seller                  Golden Hill Planning Corporation
 Assets Acquired         Business and operation of the Facility, all inventory, supplies, and other articles
                         of personal property, all Facility contracts, agreements, leases, undertakings,
                         commitments, and other arrangements which Buyer elects to assume, the
                         name “Golden Hill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center” and any other trade
                         names, logos, trademarks and service marks associated with the Facility, all
                         security deposits and prepayments, if any, for f uture services held by the
                         Seller, all menus, policies and procedures manuals and computer software, all
                         telephone numbers and telefax numbers used by the Facility, copies of all
                         books and records in the possession of Seller, all resident/patient records
                         relating to the Facility, good will in connection to the Facility, all accounts
                         receivable related to services rendered by the Facility and all cash, marketable
                         securities, deposits and cash equivalents in the New Operating account and
                         new payroll account.
 Excluded Assets         All insurance, policies, and claims relating to events occurring before the
                         Ef fective Date, all retroactive rate increases, regulation from rate appeals, audits
                         or otherwise, concerning third party payments, all amounts due from parties
                         related to Seller, all financial books and records of Seller, including, but not
                         limited to organizational and other corporate type records, all accounts
                         receivable relating to services rendered by the Facility before the Effective Date
                         and the real property, and improvements thereon, and any rights relating to the
                         ownership thereof.
 Assumed Liabilities     Buyer shall assume at the Closing, all liabilities and obligations to the Facility
                         arising on or after the Effective Date, all of Sellers’s Accounts Payable and other
                         liabilities accruing on or after the Effective Date, and all healthcare, Medicare,
                         and Medicaid overpayment and assessments liabilities.
 Purchase Price          $3,000,000 plus assumption of liabilities.
 Payment                 Cash at Closing

The applicant has submitted an affidavit, acceptable to the Department, in which the applicant agrees,
notwithstanding any agreement, arrangement, or understanding between the applicant and the transferor
to the contrary, to be liable and responsible for any Medicaid overpayments made to the facility and/or
surcharges, assessments, or fees due from the transferor pursuant to Article 28 of the Public Health Law
with respect to the period of time prior to the applicant acquiring its interest, without releasing the
transf eror, of its liability and responsibility. Currently, there are no outstanding overpayment liabilities.




                                     Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 15
Real Estate Purchase Agreement
The applicant has submitted an executed real estate purchase agreement:

 Date                  November 22, 2019
 Premises              The premises located at 99 Golden Hill Dr, Kingston, New York.
 Seller                Golden Hill Acquisition, LLC
 Purchaser             Ulster NH Realty, LLC
 Purchase Price        $37,600,000
 Payment of            $400,000 Initial Deposit to Escrowee
 Purchase              $400,000 additional deposit upon the expiration of the Due Diligence Period
 Price                 $36,800,000 at Closing

The applicant will finance the purchase price as follows:

Equity                                    $3,000,000
Bank Loan (6% for a30-year term)         $34,592,000

Lease Rental Agreement
The applicant has submitted a draft lease agreement:

Premises          The site located at 99 Golden Hill Dr, Kingston, New York
Lessor            Ulster NH Realty LLC
Lessee            Ulster NH Operation LLC
Term              25 years
Rental            Year One: $3,760,000 with a 2% increase thereafter.
Provisions        The lessee shall be responsible for maintenance, real estate taxes, utilities, and
                  insurance.

The applicant has indicated that the lease agreement will be a non-arm’s length lease arrangement in that
there is a relationship between the landlord and the tenant.

Capability and Feasibility
The purchase price for the operation is $3,000,000 and will be met via equity from the proposed
members' personal resources. The purchase for the real estate is $37,600,000 and will be met via equity
of $3,008,000 from the proposed members of the realty entity and a loan of $34,592,000 at an interest
rate of 6% for a 30-year term. BFA Attachment A shows the members of the realty entity have sufficient
f unds to meet the equity requirements.

Working capital requirements are estimated at $5,469,905, which is equivalent to two months of third-year
expenses. The proposed members of the operating entity will provide equity from their personal
resources to meet the working capital needs. Mr. Solomon Klein has submitted a disproportionate share
af f idavit attesting that he is willing to contribute personal resources disproportionate to his ownership
interest in the entity. BFA Attachment A is the net worth statements of the proposed members of Ulster
NH Operation, LLC, which indicates the availability of sufficient funds for the working capital requirement.

The submitted budget indicates a net income of $1,555,859 and $1,683,131 during the first and third
years, respectively. Revenues are based on current reimbursement methodologies. The submitted
budget appears reasonable.

As shown in BFA Attachment C, Golden Hill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center had an average positive
working capital position and an average positive net asset position from 2019 through 2021. Also, the
entity achieved an average net income of $1,651,508 from 2019 through 2021.

BFA Attachment D is the financial summaries for the other f acilities owned by the proposed members. As
shown in BFA Attachment E, all the affiliated nursing homes had an average positive working capital
position and an average positive net asset position during the period shown except for Westhampton and

                                    Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 16
Clove Lakes. Westhampton had a negative working capital position in 2019 and Clove Lakes had a
negative working capital position, negative net asset position, and losses in 2019 and 2020. All the other
f acilities that the proposed members own achieved an average net income for the period shown except
f or Clove Lake.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                         Attachments
 LTCOP Attachment        Long Term Care Ombudsman Program Recommendation
 BFA Attachment A        Net Worth Statement of Proposed Members of Operating Entity
 BFA Attachment B        Ownership of the Realty Entity
 BFA Attachment C        Financial Summary - Golden Hill Nursing
 BFA Attachment D        Financial Summary - Other Owned Nursing Facilities




                                   Project #202034-E Exhibit Page 17
                                          RESOLUTION


                RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish Ulster NH Operation LLC as the new operator of the 280-bed residential health care
facility located at 99 Golden Hill Drive, Kingston, currently operated as Golden Hill Nursing and
Rehabilitation Center, and with the contingencies, if any, as set forth below and providing that
each applicant fulfills the contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with reference to the
application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                202034 E                 Ulster NH Operations LLC d/b/a Golden Hill
                                         Center for Rehabilitating and Nursing
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of a loan commitment for the real estate, that is acceptable to the Department of
    Health. [BFA]
2. Submission of an executed lease agreement, that is acceptable to the Department of Health.
    [BFA]
3. Submission of an executed asset purchase agreement that is acceptable to the Department of
    Health. [BFA]
4. Submission of a commitment signed by the applicant which indicates that, within two years
    from the date of the council approval, the percentage of all admissions who are Medicaid and
    Medicare/Medicaid eligible at the time of admission will be at least 75 percent of the
    planning area average of all Medicaid and Medicare/Medicaid admissions, subject to possible
    adjustment based on factors such as the number of Medicaid patient days, the facility’s case
    mix, the length of time before private paying patients became Medicaid eligible, and the
    financial impact on the facility due to an increase in Medicaid admissions. [RNR]
5. Submission of a photocopy of the Certificate of Assumed Name, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
6. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Lease Agreement, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Administrative Services Agreement,
    acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
8. Submission of a photocopy of the Application for Authority for CW Kingston Operations
    LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
9. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for CW
    Kingston Operations LLC, acceptable to the Department. [(CSL]
10. Submission of a photocopy of the Application for Authority for ED Kingston Operations
    LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
11. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for ED
    Kingston Operations LL, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
12. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization for KF
    Kingston Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
13. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for KF
    Kingston Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
14. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization for ES
    Kingston Operations LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
15. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for ES
    Kingston Operations LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
16. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Articles of Organization for SE
    Kingston Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
17. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement for SE
    Kingston Operations, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
18. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Operating Agreement, acceptable to
    the Department. [CSL]
19. Submission of a photocopy of an amended and executed Partial Assignment of Membership
    Interests, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of the recommendation letter,
   including all pre-opening processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this
   date may constitute an abandonment of the project by the applicant and an expiration of the
   approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any extension
   to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]

        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
                                             Public Health and Health
                                                Planning Council
                   Project # 211087-E
The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC
   d/b/a Springvale Nursing and Rehabilitation Center
Program:      Residential Health Care Facility             County:       Westchester
Purpose:      Establishment                                Acknowledged: April 6, 2021


                                     Executive Summary

  Description                                            The proposed ownership of the nursing home is
  The Premier Center f or Rehabilitation of              as f ollows:
  Westchester, LLC, an existing New York limited
  liability company, requests approval to be                  The Premier Center for Rehabilitation
  established as the new operator of Bethel                            of Westchester, LLC
  Nursing and Rehabilitation Center, an existing           Members                            Interest
  200-bed, Article 28 Residential Health Care              Bethel Op Holdings, LLC              42.5%
  Facility (RHCF) at 67 Springvale Road, Croton-             Leah Sod (99%)
  On-Hudson (Westchester County), currently                  Zahava Bobker (1%)
  operated by The Bethel Springvale Hursing                JSB Bethel Holdings, LLC             42.5%
  Home, Inc. Once approved by PHHPC, the                     Sorah Bleier (80%)
  f acility will be named Springvale Nursing and             Aharon Bleier (20%)
  Rehabilitation Center.                                   Joel Schwartz                          10%
                                                           Lisa Saf ia                             5%
  On October 30, 2020, Bethel Springvale Nursing           Total                                 100%
  Home Inc. entered a Purchase and Sale
  Agreement for the realty whereby 67 Springvale         The Proposed realty owner is 67 Springvale
  Road, LLC agreed to purchase the realty                Road, LLC whose members are listed below:
  associated with the facility and lease the space
  to The Premier Center f or Rehabilitation of                     67 Springvale Road, LLC
  Westchester, LLC. The Asset Purchase                     Members                         Interest
  Agreement is for The Premier Center for                  JLS Equities, LLC                   45%
  Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC (operations).          Jacob Sod (100%)
  An Adult Day Health Care Program (ADHDP)                 JSB Holdco, LLC                     45%
  associated with Bethel Nursing and                        Jonathan Bleier (100%)
  Rehabilitation Center will close and therefore is        Joel Schwartz                       10%
  not part of this application.                            Total                              100%

                                                         OPCHSM/OALTC Recommendation
                                                         Contingent Approval




                                      Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 1
Need Summary                                          operations and $32,000,000 for the realty
There will be no changes to beds or services as       interests. The Premier Center for the
a result of this project. Occupancy, as of May        Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC secured a
18, 2022, was 52.0% f or the facility and 84.6%       loan with a payout period of 36 months at a rate
f or Westchester County.                              of 6% amortized over 25 years for the
                                                      operations. 67 Springfield Road, LLC submitted
Program Summary                                       a letter of interest for $32,000,000 at a 6%
The individual background review indicates the        interest rate f or term 25-year term for the realty.
applicants have met the standard for approval
                                                        Budget      Year One    Year Three
as set f orth in Public Health Law §2801-a(3)
                                                        Revenues   $19,965,600 $23,010,200
                                                        Expenses $19,711,929 $22,427,429
Financial Summary                                       Net Income   $253,671     $582,771
The total purchase price is $40,000,000,
allocated as follows: $8,000,000 for the




                                   Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 2
                                     Recommendations


Long Term Care Ombudsman Program
The LTCOP recommends Approval. (See LTCOP Attachment A)

Health Systems Agency
There will be no HSA recommendation for this project.

Office of Primary Care and Health Systems Management
Approval contingent upon:
1. Submission of an executed commitment for the purchase of the realty, acceptable to the Department
    of Health. [BFA]
2. Submission of an executed commitment for the purchase of the operations, acceptable to the
    Department of Health. [BFA]
3. Submission of an executed lease agreement acceptable to the Department. [BFA]
4. Submission of a commitment signed by the applicant which indicates that, within two years from the
    date of the council approval, the percentage of all admissions who are Medicaid and
    Medicare/Medicaid eligible at the time of admission will be at least 75 percent of the planning area
    average of all Medicaid and Medicare/Medicaid admissions, subject to possible adjustment based on
    f actors such as the number of Medicaid patient days, the facility’s case mix, the length of time before
    private paying patients became Medicaid eligible, and the financial impact on the facility due to an
    increase in Medicaid admissions. [RNR].
5. Submission of a plan to continue to enhance access to Medicaid residents. At a minimum, the plan
    should include, but not necessarily be limited to, ways in which the facility will: a. Reach out to
    hospital discharge planners to make them aware of the facility’s Medicaid Access Program; b.
    Communicate with local hospital discharge planners on a regular basis regarding bed availability at
    the nursing f acility; and identify community resources that serve the low-income and frail elderly
    population who may eventually use the nursing facility and inform them about the facility’s Medicaid
    Access policy, and c. Identify community resources that serve the low-income and frail elderly
    population who may eventually use the nursing facility and inform them about the facility's Medicaid
    Access policy. [RNR]
6. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Certificate of Amendment of the Articles of Organization of
    The Premier Center f or Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Certificate of Amendment of the Articles of Organization of
    Bethel Op Holdings LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
8. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Certificate of Amendment of the Articles of Organization of
    JSB Bethel Holdings LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
9. Submission of photocopy of an amended and executed Second Amendment of the Operating
    Agreement of The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
10. Submission of an executed Lease Agreement between 67 Springvale Road LLC and The Premier
    Center f or Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]

Approval conditional upon:
1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of the recommendation letter, including all
   pre-opening processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this date may constitute an
   abandonment of the project by the applicant and the expiration of the approval. It is the responsibility
   of the applicant to request prior approval for any extensions to the project approval expiration date.
   [PMU]

Council Action Date
December 8, 2022



                                     Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 3
                                         Need and Program Analysis
Program Information
                   Existing                                       Proposed
 Facility Name     Bethel Nursing & Rehabilitation                Springvale Nursing and Rehabilitation
                   Center                                         Center
 Address           67 Springvale Road                             Same
                   Croton-On-Hudson, NY 10520
 RHCF Capacity     200 beds                                       Same
 ADHCP Capacity    Of f site – 25                                 None
 Type of Operator  Not-f or-profit corporation                    Limited Liability Company
 Class of Operator Voluntary                                      Proprietary
 Operator          Bethel Springvale Nursing                      The Premier Center f or Rehabilitation of
                   Home, Inc.                                     Westchester, LLC

                                                                  Members
                                                                  Bethel Op Holdings LLC           42.5%
                                                                     Leah Sod* (99%)
                                                                     Zahava Bobker (1%)
                                                                  JSB Bethel Holdings LLC          42.5%
                                                                     Sorah Bleier* (80%)
                                                                     Aharon Bleier (20%)
                                                                  Joel Schwartz                    10.0%
                                                                  Lisa Sofia                        5.0%

                                                                  *Managing Member

The ADHCP is not included in the sale of this facility and is an excluded asset. No administrative services
or consulting agreements are proposed in this application. The applicant does not intend to utilize any
staf fing agencies upon their assumption of ownership.

Analysis

                                    Bethel Nursing & Rehabilitation Center
                                            vs. Westchester County
                                100.0%


                                 90.0%
               Occupancy Rate




                                 80.0%


                                 70.0%


                                 60.0%


                                 50.0%
                                          2016       2017        2018        2019        2020         2021
           Facility                       87.8%      89.1%       86.3%       83.2%       63.6%       54.6%
           Westchester County             92.8%      93.0%       92.3%       91.7%       78.8%       80.8%
           Planning Optimum               97.0%      97.0%       97.0%       97.0%       97.0%       97.0%


                                              Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 4
2020 occupancy was impacted by COVID-19. Recently, the current operator has sent most new
residents to two related facilities, Bethel Nursing Home Company and the Knolls.

In order to improve occupancy, the new operator intends to implement a new marketing plan to reposition
the f acility in the community, to promote the skills of the new operator, and to have a dedicated
admissions team that will reach out to local hospitals and physicians to coordinate the continuation of
patient care. Per the weekly census data, the occupancy, as of September 21, 2022, was 54.5% for the
f acility and 85.5% for Westchester County

Medicaid Access
To ensure that the Residential Health Care Facility needs of the Medicaid population are met, 10 NYCRR
§670.3 requires applicants to accept and admit a reasonable percentage of Medicaid residents in their
service area. The benchmark is 75% of the annual percentage of residential health care facility
admissions that are Medicaid-eligible individuals in their planning area. An applicant will be required to
make appropriate adjustments in its admission policies and practices to meet this benchmark which can
be adjusted by the following factors:
    • the number of individuals within the planning area currently awaiting placement to a residential
        health care f acility and the proportion of total individuals awaiting such placement that are
        Medicaid patients and/or alternate level of care patients in general hospitals;
    • the proportion of the facility's total patient days that are Medicaid patient days and the length of
        time that the f acility's patients who are admitted as private paying patients remain such before
        becoming Medicaid eligible;
    • the proportion of the facility's admissions who are Medicare patients or patients whose services
        are paid for under provisions of the federal Veterans' Benefit Law;
    • the f acility's patient case mix based on the intensity of care required by the facility's patients or
        the extent to which the facility provides services to patients with unique or specialized needs;
    • the f inancial impact on the facility due to an increase in Medicaid patient admissions.

The f acility’s Medicaid admissions rate was below the threshold of 75% of the Westchester County rate
f or 2019 and 2020.

 Medicaid Access                           2019        2020        2021
 Westchester County Total                  28.4%       31.3%       27.2%
   Westchester Threshold Value             21.3%       23.5%       20.4%
   Bethel Nursing & Rehab Center           20.6%        19.6%      40.3%

Character and Competence - Assessment
Leah Sod holds a bachelor’s degree in psychology from Queens College and reports employment as a
real estate consultant. They disclose the following health facility ownership interest:
   New York Facilities
   Massapequa Center Rehabilitation and Nursing Center (5%)                        11/2017 to Present

Zahava Bobker is an Administrative Assistant at Premier Healthcare Management LLC in Great Neck,
NY, with previous employment listed as a Customer Service Assistant at Fairmont Insurance Brokers Ltd.
in Brooklyn, NY. They do not disclose any licenses or degrees. Zahava Bobker discloses the following
health f acility interests:
   Maryland Facilities
   Sterling Care at Frostburg Village (0.12%)                                01/2018 to present
   Sterling Care at South Mountain (0.12%)                                   01/2018 to present
   Sterling Care Harbor Pointe (Asst. Living) (0.12%)                        01/2018 to present

   Pending
   CON 192237 JAG Operating LLC d/b/a Foltsbrook Center f or Nursing and Rehabilitation



                                     Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 5
Aharon Bleier is the current Director of Operations for Wym Op Holdings, and he indicates previous
employment at Highfield Gardens Care Center as Accounts Receivable/ Accounts Payable Manager.
Aharon Bleier holds a Rabbinical degree from Tif eres Israel. He discloses the following health facility
interests:
   New York Facilities
   Massapequa Center for Nursing (5%)                                             11/2017 to present
   Sunset Nursing & Rehabilitation (9.9%)                                         02/2019 to present

   Pennsylvania Facilities
   Wyomissing Health and Rehabilitation Center (80%)                              10/2019 to present

   Pending
   CON 192237 JAG Operating LLC d/b/a Foltsbrook Center f or Nursing and Rehabilitation

Sorah Bleier discloses employment at Peer Bais Yaacov of Rockland as a teacher, and previously she
was a teacher at Beth Rochelle. She holds a teaching degree from BJJ Seminary. Sorah Bleier discloses
the f ollowing health facility ownership interest:
   New York Facilities
   Highfield Gardens Care Center (9%)                                      09/2010 to present

Lisa Sofia discloses employment as a CEO/Consultant at BHO Services, the Executive Director at Deer
Meadows Retirement Community (CCRC), and the CEO at Premier Healthcare Management LLC
concurrently. She has a Master’s Degree in Public Health Education from Saint Joseph’s University. Lisa
Sof ia discloses the following health facility ownership interest:
   Pennsylvania Facilities
   Pleasant Acres (3%)                                                        10/2018 to present
   Willow TerraceWT Operating LLC (5%)                                        05/2018 to present

Joel Schwartz discloses employment at The Schwartz Group NY, LLC, as a healthcare investor, and
previously he was employed as the General Manager for Medfast Billing, Inc., a medical billing company.
He has a high school diploma. Joel Schwartz discloses the following health facility ownership interests:
   New York Facilities
   Leroy Village Green Residential Healthcare Facility (10%)                    02/2019 to present
   Sunset Nursing and Rehab Center (9%)                                         01/2019 to present

   Florida Facilities
   Manatee Springs Rehab and Nursing Center (7%)                                  04/2017 to present
   Page Rehabilitation and Healthcare Center (10%)                                01/2019 to present

Quality Review
                               CMS Star Rating Criteria - 10 NYCRR 600.2(b)(5)(iv)
                                                 Duration of Ownership
                                        < 48 Months               48 months or more
     Proposed           Total    Number        Percent of       Number       Percent of
      Owner            Nursing      of          Nursing           of           Nursing
                       Homes     Nursing     Homes With a       Nursing    Homes With a
                                 Homes       Below Average      Homes     Below Average
                                                 Rating                         Rating
 Aharon Bleier            3         2             50%              1
 Sorah Bleier             1         0                              1            100%
 Zahava Bobker            2         0                              2            100%
 Joel Schwartz            4         3           66.66%             1
 Leah Sod                 1         0                              1
 Lisa Sofia               2         0                              2            100%
Duration of Ownership as of 12/8/2022
Data as of: 09/2022


                                        Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 6
The proposed owners’ portfolio includes ownership in f our New York facilities. Two of the New York
f acilities have a CMS overall quality rating of average or higher.

Sunset Nursing and Rehabilitation Center currently has a one-star overall category. The applicant states:
Since Aharon Bleier and Joel Schwartz joined as shareholders of the facility in 2019, several steps have
been taken to address quality and improve operations. These steps include implementing a new
Electronic Medical Record system (in March 2019), which has improved efficiency and outcomes across
all disciplines. Furthermore, the facility retained the services of an on-site consultant (in May 2021) to
review quality and overall operations. These shareholders have also aligned the facility’s policies and
procedures with the shareholders’ larger affiliated facilities to take advantage of best practices. This was
a key factor in helping the facility maintain quality operations throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
Furthermore, the shareholders have implemented additional recruiter positions at the facility and
throughout the organization to focus on interviewing and hiring high-quality staff members. Finally, the
shareholders have strengthened the facility’s clinical team by supplying regional Quality Assurance
Nurses who provide routine audits of regulatory requirements.

Highf ield Gardens Care Center has a two-star overall category. The applicant states:
The facility has hired a new administration team to achieve and maintain these improvements. Since the
change in the senior management team, the facility has maintained five (5) stars in the Quality Measures
rating. This rating has been maintained by conducting monthly Quality Measure meetings with the clinical
and medical teams to review each resident’s goal of care and to ensure that residents’ needs are being
met. The facility’s last two (2) health inspections under the new leadership resulted in only two (2) minor,
D-level tags. This facility was the first facility in New York State to have an annual, post-COVID-19
survey. Since that time, the facility improved from four (4) stars to five (5) stars in the Quality Measures
rating, from one (1) star to three (3) stars in the Staffing rating and from one (1) star to three (3) stars in
the Overall rating. However, the most-recent star rating calculation, which was based on May 2022
information, resulted in a decrease in the Staffing and Quality Measures categories based on an isolated
nursing incident, which resulted in a loss of one (1) Health Inspection rating star, which then resulted in
the facility receiving two (2) stars in the Overall category.

The proposed owners’ portfolio includes ownership in three Pennsylvania facilities, all of which are below
average. Pleasant Acres Rehabilitation and Nursing is on the Special Focus Facility Candidate List.
According to the applicant, this was the result of poor survey results from 2019. As such, the applicant is
expecting that the facility will drop off the list within the next 90 days based on results from the last three
annual surveys. Looking ahead, the facility is pleased to report that it had a very positive health inspection
survey during the first quarter of 2022, and it is expected that the Health Inspection star rating will
improve, as should the facility’s overall star rating. In addition, the facility is in the process of hiring
additional Registered Nurses and other staff, which should also serve to enhance the facility’s staffing
rating and the overall rating.

Willow Terrace Rehabilitation and Nursing Center currently shows two stars in the overall category.
According to the applicant, the facility graduated from the Special Focus Facility program in 2020. The
f acility is expecting to receive the results of its most-recent survey any day and it is expected that this
survey will result in minimal negative findings. As such, the applicant expects that this facility will have
three stars in the near term.

The proposed owner’s portfolio includes two Maryland facilities, two of which are below average. Sterling
Care at Frostburg Village currently has a two-star rating overall rating. The applicant states: This facility
has not had a health inspection survey in more than three (3) years. However, the facility is pleased to
report that it has moved from having one (1) star in the Overall category during 2018, 2019, 2020 and
2021 to having two (2) stars in the Overall category as of April 2022, due to its four (4) stars in the Quality
Measures rating. The facility also reports that its Quality Measures rating is very close to becoming five
(5) stars. As a result, it is expected that this facility’s Overall rating will move up to three (3) stars within
the near term.

Sterling Care at South Mountain shows two (2) stars in the Overall category with five (5) stars in Quality
Measures. The applicant states: This facility was purchased in 2018 and the facility’s last full
recertification survey was in November of 2019, in which the facility received four (4) D-level (no harm
                                      Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 7
with the potential for minimal harm) deficiencies. The facility has not had a recertification survey in almost
three (3) years. The Overall rating has been negatively impacted by the facility’s Staffing rating of one (1)
star. Over the past several years, the facility has experienced difficulties in hiring and retaining qualified
RNs. As a result, the facility has hired Licensed Practical Nurses (LPNs) to provide the nursing coverage
for its residents, despite the difficult circumstances in the labor market. Since the newly updated CMS
staffing calculation provides for a higher value to be attributed to RNs versus LPNs, the facility’s Staffing
rating has decreased during 2022. To mitigate the effects of this situation, the facility utilizes the services
of multiple nursing staffing agencies and continuously works to fill any gaps the facility may experience
due to the shortage of qualified RNs.

The proposed owner’s portfolio includes two Florida facilities, one of which is below average. Page
Rehabilitation and Healthcare Center currently has a two-star overall rating. The applicant states: The
facility recently had its annual survey and the results were very positive and resulted in minimal
deficiencies. As a result, the facility’s overall star rating is expected to increase once these survey results
are reflected in CMS records.

                                   Ownership                       Health         Quality
 Facility                           Since           Overall      Inspection      Measures         Staffing
 New York
 Bethel Nursing &
 Rehabilitation Center
                                     Subject
                                     Facility         **             **             ***             **
 Highf ield Gardens Care             Current         ****            ***           *****            **
 Center Of Great Neck                09/2010         ****            ***           ****            ****
 Leroy Village Green
                                     Current          ***            ***           ****            ***
                                     08/2019          ***            **            *****            **
 Massapequa Center
 Rehabilitation and Nursing
                                     Current          **             **            *****            *
 Center                              11/2017          ***            **            *****           ***
 Sunset Nursing and Rehab            Current           *              *             ***             *
 Center                              01/2019          **             ***            ***             *
 Pennsylvania

 Willow Terrace
                                     Current          **             ***            ***             *
                                     05/2018          **              *            *****           ***
 Wyomissing Health And               Current          ***            ***           ****             *
 Rehabilitation Center               05/2016         ****            ***           *****           ***
 Pleasant Acres Nursing And          Current           *              *             **              *
 Rehabilitation Center †             10/2018          **              *             ***            ****
 Maryland

 Sterling Care At South              Current          **              **           ****              **
 Mountain                            11/2018          **              **            **               **

                                      Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 8
                                   Ownership                      Health         Quality
 Facility                           Since          Overall      Inspection      Measures        Staffing

 Sterling Care At Frostburg          Current          **            **            ****             *
 Village                            11/2018            *             *             ***            ***
 Florida

 Manatee Springs Rehab and           Current        ****            ***          *****           ***
 Nursing Center                     04/2017           *              *            ***            ***
 Page Rehabilitation and             Current         **              *           *****           ***
 Healthcare Center                  01/2019          **              *           *****           ****
Data as of: 09/2022

Enforcement History
Page Rehabilitation and Healthcare Center (Florida):
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 4/18/2022 in the amount of $3,618
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 4/11/2022 in the amount of $3,289
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 4/4/2022 in the amount of $2,960
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 3/28/2022 in the amount of $2,631
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 3/21/2022 in the amount of $3,542
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 3/14/2022 in the amount of $1,973
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 3/7/2022 in the amount of $1,645
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 2/28/2022 in the amount of $1,316
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 2/28/2022 in the amount of $987
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 2/14/2022 in the amount of $658
   • The f acility was assessed federal CMPs on 01/30/2020 in the amount of $92,563 and $92,564 for
      f ailing to honor the residents' right to request, refuse and or discontinue treatment and administer
      the f acility in a manner that enables it to use its resources effectively and efficiently respectively.

Willow Terrace Nursing and Rehabilitation Center (Pennsylvania):
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 6/28/2021 in the amount of $650
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 4/28/2021 in the amount of $9,750
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMPs of $143,579 on 09/20/19 for not providing appropriate
        treatment and care according to orders, resident’s preferences, and goals; and $16,544 on
        10/31/18 f or not ensuring food and drink are palatable, attractive, and at a safe and appetizing
        temperature.
    • They also received a G level tag on 06/19/19 for not ensuring that a nursing home area is free
        f rom accident hazards and provides adequate supervision to prevent accidents.

Pleasant Acres (Pennsylvania):
    • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $111,813 on 09/03/21 for not developing and
       implementing a complete care plan that meets all the resident's needs, with timetables and
       actions that can be measured and protecting each resident from all types of abuse such as
       physical, mental, sexual abuse, physical punishment, and neglect by anybody. The latter of these
       resulted in physical harm for one of three residents reviewed.
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 7/19/2021 in the amount of $650
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 3/30/2021 in the amount of $15,289
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 10/29/2020 in the amount of $22,750
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 7/15/2020 in the amount of $13,000
    • The f acility received a G tag on 02/01/19 for not ensuring that a nursing home area is free from
       accident hazards and provides adequate supervision to prevent accidents


                                     Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 9
    •   K tag on 08/29/19 for not providing appropriate treatment and care according to orders, resident’s
        pref erences and goals.

Sterling Care at Forstburg Village (Maryland):
    • The f acility was assessed federal CMP’s on 4/11/2022 in the amount of $658
    • They received a J level tag on 06/06/2019 for not providing appropriate treatment and care
        according to orders, residents’ preferences, and goals.

Massapequa Center Rehabilitation and Nursing (New York):
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP on 2/21/2022 in the amount of $658.
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP on 5/4/2021 in the amount of $5,000 on 5/4/2021
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $7,036 on 03/01/19 for not protecting each resident
      f rom all types of abuse such as physical, mental, sexual abuse, physical punishment, and neglect
      by anybody.
   • The f acility was fined $2,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH 20-041 issued on 9/14/2020
      f or surveillance findings on 8/14/2020. Deficiencies were found under 10 NYCRR 415.19 (a) (1),
      (a)(2), and (b)(1) Isolation/social distancing.
   • The f acility was fined $10,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH19-027 issued on 7/3/2019 for
      surveillance findings on 3/1/2018

Sunset Nursing and Rehab Center (New York):
   • The f acility was fined $2,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH-21-206 issued on 11/17/2021
       f or surveillance findings on 7/21/2021. Deficiencies were f ound under 10 NYCRR sections 415.19
       (a) and 415.19(b)(4) Inf ection control.
   • The f acility was assessed a federal CMP of $6,923 on 07/21/21 for not ensuring that a nursing
       home area is f ree from accident hazards and provides adequate supervision to prevent accidents,
       and not protecting each resident from all types of abuse such as physical, mental, sexual abuse,
       physical punishment, and neglect by anybody.

Highf ield Gardens Care Center of Great Neck (New York):
   • The f acility was fined $2,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH-21-222 issued on 11/23/2021
         f or surveillance findings on 9/21/2021. Deficiencies were found under
         10 NYCRR 415.19(a) Inf ection Control
   • The f acility was fined $8,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH21-050 issued on 3/13/2021 for
         surveillance findings on 1/7/2021. Deficiencies were found under 10 NYCRR sections 415.19(a)
         (1-2), 415.19 (b)(4), and 400.2 and Governors Executive Order 202.11. Deficiencies are for
         Inf ection Control, PPE, and Handwashing.
   • The f acility was fined $2,000 pursuant to Stipulation and Order NH20-071 issued on 9/15/2020 for
         surveillance findings on 8/13/2020. Deficiencies were found under 10NYCRR sections
         419.19(a)(1), 415.19(a)(2) Inf ection Control – Facemask.

Conclusion
The individual background review indicates the applicants have met the standard for approval as set forth
in Public Health Law §2801-a(3). There will be no changes to beds or services as a result of this project.




                                   Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 10
                                      Financial Analysis
Operating Budget
The applicant has provided an operating budget, in 2022 dollars, for the first and third years after the
change of ownership. The budget is summarized below:

                             Current Year                 Year One                    Year Three
                                (2020)                      (2023)                      (2025)
                        Per Diem      Total         Per Diem       Total        Per Diem      Total
 Inpatient Revenues
 Commercial FFS          $310.00        $17,360       $312.15     $1,936,900      $355.83     $2,207,900
 Medicare FFS            $742.15      3,140,759       $728.32      4,039,268      $860.11      4,770,185
 Medicare MC             $712.43      1,077,196       $728.28      1,383,732      $742.85      1,411,415
 Medicaid FFS            $225.41      6,238,562       $239.83      6,094,942      $385.42     11,725,416
 Medicaid MC             $225.41      2,135,084       $239.89      4,323,058       $23.90        430,684
 Private Pay             $390.78      1,404,865       $390.19      1,936,900      $395.19      2,207,900
 Other*                                     278                        1,200                       1,200
 Medicare Part B                              0                      249,600                     255,500
 Total Inpatient Rev.               $14,014,104                  $19,965,600                 $23,010,200

 ADHCP Revenues
 Commercial FFS          $153.11         $23,732
 Medicaid FFS            $152.47         128,071
 Private Pay             $128.00           1,024
 Total Outpt Rev.                       $152,827

 Non-Oper. Rev.                       3,352,235
 Total Revenues                     $17,519,166                  $19,965,600                 $23,010,200

 Expenses
 Operating Exp.                     $17,526,520                  $14,039,397                 $16,254,298
 Capital Exp.                         1,089,774                    5,672,532                   6,273,131
 Total Exp.                         $18,616,194                  $19,711,929                 $22,427,429

 Net Income/(Loss)                  ($1,097,028)                    $253,671                    $582,771

 Total Patient Days                       46,543                       62,050                      69,350
 Total ADHCP Visits                        1,003                            0                           0
 Occupancy (RHCF)                        63.76%                       85.00%                      94.94%

*Other revenue is Investment income, contributed services, and general contributions.

The f ollowing is noted concerning the submitted budget:
 • The Medicare and Private Pay rates are projected based on current market rates.
 • ADCHP revenue and expenses are not included in Years One and Three as this will not be part of
     the f uture operation of the RHCF.
 • Medicare utilization is expected to increase significantly in Years One and Three as the applicant
     plans to provide short-term rehabilitation resident service.
 • The current year's Medicaid rate is based on the facility’s current Medicaid experience.
 • The budget indicates a plan to increase occupancy by working with hospitals, and community-based
     organizations and implementing a 24-hour-per-day admissions protocol to ensure easy access for
     discharge planners.



                                    Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 11
 • The current year's occupancy is 63.76% due to the negative effects of COVID-19, but the facility is
   taking steps to increase occupancy. Pre-COVID-19 the facility’s occupancy was at 83.2%, and the
   average occupancy for Westchester County was 84.6% as of 6/1/22.
 • The applicant will add experienced staff to the facility to stabilize operations. The new operator will
   invest significant resources to market the facility effectively. This proposed marketing campaign will
   f ocus on communication and relationship building with area doctors, hospitals, and residents' family
   members regarding improvements made at the facility. The applicant states that similar marketing
   plans have been successful at the applicant's members' affiliated facilities.

Utilization by payor source is as follows:
                                   RHCF         RHCF         RHCF
        Payor                 Current Yr.       Year 1       Year 3
        Commercial FFS              .12%       10.00%        8.95%
        Medicare FFS               9.09%        8.94%        8.00%
        Medicare MC                3.25%        3.06%        2.74%
        Medicaid FFS             59.46%        40.96%       47.17%
        Medicaid MC              20.35%        29.04%       25.99%
        Private Pay                7.72%        8.00%        7.16%
        Total                       100%         100%         100%

Asset Purchase Agreement
The applicant has submitted a draft Asset Purchase Agreement (APA) for the RHCF’s operating interest.
The terms of the agreement are summarized below:

 Date:                   October 30, 2020
 Seller:                 The Bethel Springvale Nursing Home, Inc. (Operations)
 Buyer:                  The Premier Center f or Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC (Operations)
 Rate:                   6% Letter of interest has been submitted from Capital Funding, LLC
 Purchased Assets:       Operational Assets: Operations seller’s rights, title, and interest in every
                         kind, nature, and description owned or leased in connection with the
                         business; sellers rights to deposits relating to prepayments or prepaid
                         expenses; complete copies of all personnel records and payroll information;
                         any insurance claims and rights concerning injury, damage or loss related or
                         arising f rom the Purchased Assets; rights, title, and interest in regards to
                         providing services and proprietary information agreements related to the
                         business; all the seller’s books and records relating to the operations of the
                         business and medical records; any funds held in trust by the seller in
                         connection with the resident’s funds.
 Excluded Assets:        Contracts of Seller that are not assigned or assumed; Seller’s Medicaid
 (Operational & Real     provider number or provider status; the Adult Day Care Program operated by
 Property)               Seller; Vehicles that the seller currently owns; retroactive reimbursements
                         concerning Medicaid, or settlements and or adjustments.
 Purchase Price:         $8,000,000 f or the operations.
 Payment of              The payout period is 36 months amortized over 25 years. A letter of interest
 Purchase Price:         has been provided to the Department for the purchase price.

The applicant submitted a Medicaid affidavit, acceptable to the Department, where the applicant agrees,
notwithstanding any agreement, arrangement, or understanding between the applicant and the transferor
to the contrary, to be liable and responsible for any Medicaid overpayments made to the facility and/or
surcharges, assessments or fees due from the transferor under Article 28 of the Public Health Law
concerning the period before the applicant acquiring its interest, without releasing the transferor of its
liability and responsibility. As of June 5, 2022, the facility has outstanding Medicaid liabilities totaling
$18,561, which will be added to working capital and, per the pro forma, paid out of operations.




                                    Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 12
Purchase and Sale Agreement (Realty)
The applicant has submitted an executed (Purchase and Sale Agreement) for the RHCF’s Realty
Purchase Agreement. The terms of the agreement are summarized below:

 Seller:                          The Bethel Springvale Nursing Home, Inc.
 Buyer:                           67 Springvale Nursing Home, LLC
 Purchase Price:                  $32,000,000
 Rate:                            6%
 Term:                            25 years.
 Payment of Purchase Price:       Capital Funding, LLC has submitted a letter of interest.
 Provisions:                      Expected to be permanently refinanced through HUD 232/223F. If
                                  f unding is not favorable, Sorah Bleier has provided an affidavit stating
                                  she will provide a balloon payment for the residual amount owed.

This is a non-arm’s length agreement between the parties as listed above in the narrative.

Lease Agreement
The applicant submitted a draft lease agreement for the RHCF, the terms are summarized as follows:

 Date:         To-Be-Determined
 Premises:     200-bed RHCF 67 Springvale Road, Croton-On-Hudson (Westchester County).
 Landlord:     67 Springvale Road, LLC
 Tenant:       The Premier Center f or Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC
 Term:         10-year term
 Rental:       $4,500,000 annually, subject to an increase of 2% of the prior year’s base rent, on each
               anniversary of the commencement date.
 Provisions:   Lessee at its sole cost and expense will maintain, repair, or replace and restore the
               property to its original condition if necessary. Lessee shall not make alterations in the
               demised premises without the permission of Lessor.

The Premier Center f or rehabilitation of Westchester (Operations) has entered into a non-arm’s length
agreement with 67 Springfield Road, LLC (Realty), and The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of
Westchester, LLC does have common ownership.

Capability and Feasibility
There are no project costs associated with this application. The total purchase price for the operating
interest and realty acquisition is $40,000,000; $32,000,000 for the Real Estate, and $8,000,000 for the
operations. The Real Estate portion of the transaction will be met with a loan of $32,000,000 over 25
years at a 6% interest rate, for which Capital Funding, LLC provided a letter of interest. The purchase
price f or acquiring the operating interests is $8,000,000. The applicant submitted a draft APA for the
purchase price of the facility operations at a rate of 6% for a 36-month term amortized over 25 years.

The working capital requirement is $3,627,738, based on two months of first-year expenses. BFA
Attachment A shows that the members have sufficient funds via member equity to satisfy the funding
requirement. In addition, Sorah Bleier has submitted a disproportionate share affidavit to any member of
The Premier Center f or Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC that cannot meet the equity requirements.

BFA Attachment B is the 2019-2020 certified financial statements and the November 30, 2021 Internal
f inancial statements for the facility. The f acility experienced a negative working capital and equity position
f or both periods. The f acility showed an operating loss of $1,776,120 in 2019 and $1,097,028, in 2020.
The internal f inancial statements show negative working capital, net asset positions, and an operating
loss of $161,708. These losses were driven by the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Before
the pandemic, the facility planned to increase occupancy by working with providers seeking facility
admissions, a robust marketing program that will also work with local hospitals, and a dedicated
admissions team who will work with physician groups and groups to coordinate the continuation of patient
care.

                                     Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 13
The submitted budget shows a projected net income of $253,671 and $582,771 for the first and third
years. The budget appears reasonable. BFA Attachment C is the pro forma to the financial position on the
f irst day of operations showing members’ equity of $3,657,000.

Attachment D is a f inancial summary using the certified financial statements for the affiliated facilities.
Massapequa Center for Rehabilitation and Nursing (2021); Wedgewood Care Center, Inc (2020); and
Leroy Village Green Residential Health Care Facility (2021) had positive working capital, working capital,
and net income position. Sunset Nursing and Rehabilitation (2020) had negative working capital and net
asset position and incurred an operating loss of $1,250,219 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and
increasing operating expenses.

Conclusion
The applicant has demonstrated the capability to proceed in a financially feasible manner.



                                          Attachments
 LTCOP Attachment A       Long Term Care Ombudsman Program Recommendation
 BFA Attachment A         Net Worth-Operations - The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of Westchester
                          Net Worth- Realty- 67 Springvale Road, LLC, (Realty Interest)
 BFA Attachment B         Bethel Springvale Nursing Home Inc. 2019-2020 Certified Financial Statements
                          and 2021 Internal Financial Statement
 BFA Attachment C         Pro Forma Balance Sheet
 BFA Attachment D         Af filiated Residential Health Care Facilities.




                                    Project #211087-E Exhibit Page 14
                                          RESOLUTION


               RESOLVED, that the Public Health and Health Planning Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2801-a of the Public Health Law, on this 8th day of December 2022,
having considered any advice offered by the Regional Health Systems Agency, the staff of the
New York State Department of Health, and the Establishment and Project Review Committee of
this Council and after due deliberation, hereby proposes to approve the following application to
establish The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC as the new operator of
Bethel Nursing and Rehabilitation Center, a 200-bed residential health care facility located at 67
Springvale Road, Croton-On-Hudson, and with the contingencies, if any, as set forth below and
providing that each applicant fulfills the contingencies and conditions, if any, specified with
reference to the application, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon fulfillment by the applicant of the conditions and
contingencies specified for the application in a manner satisfactory to the Public Health and
Health Planning Council and the New York State Department of Health, the Secretary of the
Council is hereby authorized to issue the approval of the Council of the application, and be it
further

                RESOLVED, that any approval of this application is not to be construed as in any
manner releasing or relieving any transferor (of any interest in the facility that is the subject of
the application) of responsibility and liability for any Medicaid (Medicaid Assistance Program --
Title XIX of the Social Security Act) or other State fund overpayments made to the facility
covering the period during which any such transferor was an operator of the facility, regardless
of whether the applicant or any other entity or individual is also responsible and liable for such
overpayments, and the State of New York shall continue to hold any such transferor responsible
and liable for any such overpayments, and be it further

               RESOLVED, that upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to submit
documentation or information in order to satisfy a contingency specified with reference to the
application, within the stated time frame, the application will be deemed abandoned or
withdrawn by the applicant without the need for further action by the Council, and be it further

              RESOLVED, that upon submission of documentation or information to satisfy a
contingency specified with reference to the application, within the stated time frame, which
documentation or information is not deemed sufficient by Department of Health staff, to satisfy
the contingency, the application shall be returned to the Council for whatever action the Council
deems appropriate.


                NUMBER:                  FACILITY/APPLICANT:

                211087 E                 The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of
                                         Westchester, LLC d/b/a Springvale Nursing and
                                         Rehabilitation Center
APPROVAL CONTINGENT UPON:

1. Submission of an executed commitment for the purchase of the realty, acceptable to the
    Department of Health. [BFA]
2. Submission of an executed commitment for the purchase of the operations, acceptable to the
    Department of Health. [BFA]
3. Submission of an executed lease agreement acceptable to the Department. [BFA]
4. Submission of a commitment signed by the applicant which indicates that, within two years
    from the date of the council approval, the percentage of all admissions who are Medicaid and
    Medicare/Medicaid eligible at the time of admission will be at least 75 percent of the
    planning area average of all Medicaid and Medicare/Medicaid admissions, subject to possible
    adjustment based on factors such as the number of Medicaid patient days, the facility’s case
    mix, the length of time before private paying patients became Medicaid eligible, and the
    financial impact on the facility due to an increase in Medicaid admissions. [RNR].
5. Submission of a plan to continue to enhance access to Medicaid residents. At a minimum, the
    plan should include, but not necessarily be limited to, ways in which the facility will: a.
    Reach out to hospital discharge planners to make them aware of the facility’s Medicaid
    Access Program; b. Communicate with local hospital discharge planners on a regular basis
    regarding bed availability at the nursing facility; and identify community resources that serve
    the low-income and frail elderly population who may eventually use the nursing facility and
    inform them about the facility’s Medicaid Access policy, and c. Identify community
    resources that serve the low-income and frail elderly population who may eventually use the
    nursing facility and inform them about the facility's Medicaid Access policy. [RNR]
6. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Certificate of Amendment of the Articles of
    Organization of The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC, acceptable to
    the Department. [CSL]
7. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Certificate of Amendment of the Articles of
    Organization of Bethel Op Holdings LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
8. Submission of a photocopy of an executed Certificate of Amendment of the Articles of
    Organization of JSB Bethel Holdings LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]
9. Submission of photocopy of an amended and executed Second Amendment of the Operating
    Agreement of The Premier Center for Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC, acceptable to the
    Department. [CSL]
10. Submission of an executed Lease Agreement between 67 Springvale Road LLC and The
    Premier Center for Rehabilitation of Westchester, LLC, acceptable to the Department. [CSL]

APPROVAL CONDITIONAL UPON:

1. This project must be completed by one year from the date of the recommendation letter,
   including all pre-opening processes, if applicable. Failure to complete the project by this
   date may constitute an abandonment of the project by the applicant and the expiration of the
   approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request prior approval for any extensions
   to the project approval expiration date. [PMU]
        Documentation submitted to satisfy the above-referenced contingencies shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days. Enter a complete response to each individual contingency via
the New York State Electronic Certificate of Need (NYSE-CON) system by the due date(s)
reflected in the Contingencies Tab in NYSE-CON.
