Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yrtph 

The Conundrum of the PFOA human half-life, an 
international collaboration 

Jerry Campbell a, Harvey Clewell a, Tony Cox b, Michael Dourson c, *, Shannon Ethridge d, 
Norman Forsberg e, Bernard Gadagbui c, Ali Hamade f, Ravi Naidu g, Nathan Pechacek h, Tiago 
Severo Peixe i, Robyn Prueitt j, Mahesh Rachamalla k, Lorenz Rhomberg j, James Smith l, 
Nitin Verma m 
a Ramboll, US Corporation, USA 
b Cox Associates, Colorado, USA 
c Toxicology Excellence for Risk Assessment, Ohio, USA 
d International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, California, USA 
e Arcadis U.S. Inc, USA 
f Oregon Health Authority, Oregon, USA 
g CRC CARE, Callaghan, Australia 
h Ecolab, Minnesota, USA 
i State University of Londrina, Parana, Brazil 
j Gradient, Massachusetts, USA 
k Department of Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada 
l Navy and Marine Corps Public Health Center, Virginia, USA 
m Chitkara University, School of Pharmacy, Himachal Pradesh, India   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Handling Editor: Dr. Lesa Aylward  

The  Steering  Committee  of  the  Alliance  for  Risk  Assessment  (ARA)  opened  a  call  for  scientists  interested  in 
resolving  what  appeared  to  be  a  conundrum  in  estimating  of  the  half-life  of  perfluorooctanoate  (PFOA)  in 
humans. An Advisory Committee was formed from nominations received and a subsequent invitation led to the 
development of three small independent working groups to review appropriate information and attempt a res-
olution.  Initial  findings  were  shared  among  these  groups  and  a  conclusion  developed  from  the  ensuing 
discussions. 

Many human observational studies have estimated the PFOA half-life. Most of these studies note the likely 
occurrence of unmonitored PFOA exposures, which could inflate values of the estimated PFOA half-life. Also, few 
of these studies estimated the half-life of PFOA isomers, the branched chains of which likely have shorter half- 
lives. This could deflate values of the estimated linear PFOA half-life. Fortunately, several studies informed both 
of these potential problems. The majority opinion of this international collaboration is that the studies striking 
the  best  balance  in  addressing  some  of  these  uncertainties  indicate  the  likely  central  tendency  of  the  human 
PFOA half-life is less than 2 years. The single best value appears to be the geometric mean (GM) of 1.3 years 
(Zhang et al., 2013, Table 3), based on a GM = 1.7 years in young females (n = 20) and GM = 1.2 years in males 
of all ages and older females (n = 66). However, a combined median value from Zhang et al. (2013) of 1.8 years 
also  adds  value  to  this  range  of  central  tendency.  While  the  Collaboration  found  this  study  to  be  the  least 
encumbered with unmonitored PFOA exposures and branched isomers, more studies of similar design would be 
valuable.  Also  valuable  would  be  clarification  around  background  exposures  in  other  existing  studies  in  case 
adjustments to half-life estimates are attempted.   

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: dourson@tera.org (M. Dourson).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2022.105185 
Received 2 February 2022; Received in revised form 26 April 2022; Accepted 1 May 2022   

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)105185Availableonline7May20220273-2300/©2022ElsevierInc.Allrightsreserved.J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

1. Introduction 

Estimated safe doses for PFOA vary by several hundred-fold among 
government organizations (Dourson et al., 2019; Mikkonen et al., 2021; 
Drinking  Water Inspectorate, 2021). This wide range is  due to differ-
ences in both the judgment of PFOA’s critical effect and its elimination 
in experimental animal versus humans or among humans. In particular, 
elimination half-life estimates of PFOA in humans have been made in 
numerous observational studies and are found to vary from a low of 1.2 
years  to  a  high  of  14.9  years  (Dourson  and  Gadagbui,  2021).  This 
elimination, when compared with daily excretion in experimental ani-
mals or the amount of PFOA in the animal’s body over time [measured 
as  the  Area-Under-the-Curve  (AUC)],  leads  to  adjustments  to  the 
experimental  animal  No  Observed  Adverse  Effect  Level  (NOAEL)  or 
Benchmark Dose (BMD) point of departure to determine difference safe 
doses. 

Most authors of human observational studies in which half-life es-
timates  are  rendered  have  stated  that  unmonitored  PFOA  exposures 
might exist in their studies, and that the corresponding estimates of half- 
life may therefore be inflated. Russell et al. (2015) and Bartell (2012) 
give  theoretical  underpinnings  for  this  inflation  and  show  how  ac-
counting properly for unmonitored exposures results in smaller half-life 
estimates.  For  example,  Bartell  (2012)  estimated  that  unmonitored 
background  exposures  that  contribute  20%  of  the  total  exposure  will 
greatly reduce  estimated half-life if more than two half-lives pass be-
tween the sampling time points. Bartell (2012) provided a figure that 
can  be  used  to  adjust  half-life  estimates  based  on  other  estimated 
background  exposures  and  time  between  sampling  points.  A  clinical 
study by Elcombe et al. (2013).1 that tested PFOA as a chemotherapeutic 
agent has also been used to determine a PFOA half-life of 0.5 year in a 
small  subset  (n  = 3)  of  the  whole  exposed  patient  cohort  (n  = 42) 
(Dourson  and  Gadagbui,  2021).  While  helpful  because  of  the  clinical 
nature of this study, this range adds to the disparity in estimated half-life 
values. 

This  disparity  was  recognized  by  the  Steering  Committee  of  the 
Alliance  for  Risk  Assessment  (ARA)2  as  a  problem  that  might  be 
resolvable  via  collaboration  of  interested  scientists,  similar  to  other, 
seemingly  intractable,  problems  that  cross  multiple  jurisdictions.  An 
example of the latter includes the development of a workshop series to 
showcase research case studies in response to the 2009 National Acad-
emy of Sciences publication entitled Science and Decisions (see: https 
://tera.org/Alliance%20for%20Risk/ARA_Dose-Response.htm).  ARA 
endorsed an international collaboration to meet and develop this brief 
communication which explores reasons for the large range in values of 
the  human  PFOA  half-life,  and  ways  to  reconcile  these  differences,  if 
possible. 

2. Methods 

The Steering Committee of the Alliance for Risk Assessment (ARA) 
solicited  nominations  from  interested  scientists  and  managers  in  the 
early spring of 2021 to form an advisory committee that would shepherd 

1  Elcombe et al. (2013) administered PFOA to 42 adult humans, both male 
and female, in a phase 1, range-finding, clinical trial for cancer chemotherapy. 
Doses were given once weekly as an oral tablet from 50 to 1200 mg for up to 6 
weeks.  Blood  concentrations  of  PFOA  over  6  weeks  were  closely  monitored. 
After the 6-week period, nine patients continued the therapy. Adequate kidney 
and  liver  function  and  physical  integrity  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract  were 
important criteria for acceptance of patients into the trial. No overt toxicity was 
observed. The daily mg/kg-day doses were estimated by Dourson et al. (2019) 
as 0.1–2.3 mg/kg-day and approximated exposures in the experimental animal 
studies that caused toxicity.  

the project entitled “The Conundrum of the PFOA Half-life” through to a 
potential  resolution.3  After  reviewing  nominations,  the  following  sci-
entists  were  selected  by  the  Steering  Committee  as  members  of  the 
Advisory Committee:  

⁃  Harvey Clewell, Ramboll  
⁃  Tony Cox, Cox Associates  
⁃  Michael Dourson, Toxicology Excellence for Risk Assessment 
⁃ Shannon  Ethridge,  International  Association  of  Plumbing  and  Me-

chanical Officials  

⁃  Ali Hamade, Oregon Health Authority  
⁃  Ravi Naidu, CRC CARE  
⁃  Nitin Verma, Chitkara University 

The Advisory Committee next assembled a list of relevant publica-
tions on PFOA human half-life and opened a call for interested scientists 
in the late spring of 2021 to participate in an international collaboration 
to investigate this issue. After nominations from scientists interested in 
this collaboration were reviewed, the following scientists were selected 
and arranged into three independent groups, assuring that various sec-
tors were represented in each group:  

⁃  Jerry Campbell, Ramboll  
⁃  Harvey Clewell, Ramboll  
⁃  Norman Forsberg, Arcadis U.S., Inc.  
⁃  Bernard Gadagbui, Toxicology Excellence for Risk Assessment  
⁃  Ali Hamade, Oregon Health Authority  
⁃  Ravi Naidu, CRC CARE  
⁃  Nathan Pechacek, Ecolab  
⁃  Tiago Severo Peixe, State University of Londrina, Parana, Brazil  
⁃  Robyn Prueitt, Gradient  
⁃  Andrew Prussia, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry  
⁃  Mahesh Rachamalla, University of Saskatchewan  
⁃  Lorenz Rhomberg, Gradient  
⁃  James Smith, Navy and Marine Corps Public Health Center  
⁃  Nitin Verma, Chitkara University 

The  charge  to  the  Small  Groups  was  determined  by  the  Advisory 

Committee to be as follows:  

• Select  studies  from  the  list  of  studies  found  at  https://tera.or 
for 
g/Alliance%20for%20Risk/Projects/pfoahumanhalflife.html 
further review and explain why certain studies were excluded. The 
small groups were free to add studies as appropriate and explain why 
they were added.  

• Develop  a  Small  Group  consensus  on  PFOA  half-life,  discussing 
critical issues, such as, volume of distribution, half-lives in different 
populations, and how uncertainty factors for experimental animal to 
human  extrapolation  and  within  human  variability  are  affected. 
Small Groups were free to add critical issues as appropriate.  

• No  inter-group  discussions  are  allowed  as  to  avoid  premature 

closure.  

• The deadline was August 31st, 2021 for this first round of review.  
• First intergroup international discussion was held on September 7/8, 

2021.  

• A  second  round  of  reviews  occurred  through  an  interactive  web- 

based discussion during October and early November of 2021. 
• A  position  was  developed  and  shared  with  the  international  com-
munity in December 2021 and is shown in the following results. 

2  See: 

html. 

https://tera.org/Alliance%20for%20Risk/ARA_Steering_Committee. 

3  See:  https://tera.org/Alliance%20for%20Risk/Projects/pfoahumanhalflife. 

html. 

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051852J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

3. Results 

Table  1  summarizes  studies  and  or  analyses  of  studies  that  were 
considered by the Small Groups to be of some use. Initial findings for two 
of three Small Groups did not consider any one study as sufficient for 
determining the PFOA half-life but selected a subset of better studies. 
The third Small Group considered Xu et al. (2020) to be more credible 
due to the reduced likelihood of unmonitored PFOA exposures. Initial 
findings  were  summarized  in  brief  reports  that  are  available  at  https 
://tera.org/Alliance%20for%20Risk/Projects/pfoahumanhalflife.html. 
During the course of the Collaboration most studies were judged to 
include unmonitored PFOA exposures, with the exception perhaps of the 
clinical study by Elcombe et al. (2013), where doses were sufficiently 
high  so  as  to  preclude  conflation  with  unmonitored  exposures.  For 
studies with lower serum PFOA levels, up to ~25% bias in the half-life 
was  considered  possible  due  to  these  unmonitored  PFOA  exposures 
based on the work of De Silva et al. (2020) who stated that drinking 
water “has been estimated to contribute up to 75% of exposures near 
contaminated sites.”  The Collaboration thought an argument could be 
made  for  a  20%  reduction  in  the  average  half-life  in  studies  that 
otherwise mentioned or alluded to unmonitored PFOA exposures, but 
also recognized that this adjustment would be study-dependent. Further 
to this point, Russell et al. (2015) and Bartell (2012) found that esti-
mates of PFOA half-lives that include unmonitored PFOA exposures are 
inflated,  although  the  magnitude  is  difficult  to  determine  without 
additional evaluation of individual studies. For example, Bartell (2012) 
found the three studies they evaluated to include a bias ranging from 
2.7% to 26% when compared with background exposures, although not 
all exposures may have been monitored. However, the study by Zhang 
et  al.  (2013)  was  found  by  the  Collaboration  to  be  insignificantly 
encumbered  by  unmonitored  PFOA  exposures,  since  its  estimated 
half-lives  were  based  on  estimates  of  renal  clearance  from  men  and 
women of the general Chinese population (aged 20 years–88 years) with 
no known point source of exposure to PFOA. 

An issue also arose on whether reported PFOA half-lives were spe-
cific to the straight chain isomer of PFOA, represented measurement and 
summation  of  mixtures  of  several  PFOA  isomers,  or  accounted  for 
exposure to PFOA precursors. Benskin et al. (2009) and De Silva et al. 
(2009)  reported  faster  elimination  rates  and  shorter  half-lives  for 
branched  isomers  of  PFOA  compared  to  linear  PFOA  in  rats  gavaged 
with  an  electrochemically  fluorinated  PFOA  standard.  Beesoon  and 
Martin (2015) provided a mechanistic explanation for the faster elimi-
nation rate of branched isomers of PFOA that was related to dissociation 
constants (Kd) of linear and branched PFOA isomers with human serum 
albumin.  Beesoon  and  Martin  (2015)  showed  that  Kds  were  three  to 
four-fold  higher  for  individual  branched  isomers  compared  to  linear 
PFOA and that branched isomers were less protein bound than linear 
PFOA  in  experiments  that  evaluated  a  technical  mixture  of  PFOA. 
However, the analytical methods employed to analyze PFOA in blood 
have  not  used  consistent  quantification  procedures  and  few  studies 
reporting  serum  elimination  rates  in  human  populations  have  distin-
guished  between  PFOA  isomers  in  their  analytical  methods  (Bartell 
et al., 2010; Gomis et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018). An exception to this is the 
study by Zhang et al. (2013) that analyzed and determined elimination 
rates for branched and linear PFOA isomers. Since branched PFOA iso-
mers were seen to be eliminated more quickly (see Zhang et al., 2013, 

Table 3), this would lower the overall PFOA half-life in situations where 
PFOA included a substantial percentage of branched isomers.4 Exposure 
to PFOA precursors might also artificially inflate half-life estimates for 
PFOA. The Collaboration considered this to be a critical issue for human 
health risk assessment, where risk-based criteria and/or standards for 
PFOA are often calculated using a single human PFOA half-life estimate 
(for which the profile of PFOA isomers is not commonly reported), but 
applied to samples quantified using analytical methods that sum isomers 
to report a single PFOA value.5 

The Collaboration discovered after a more careful reading of studies 
in  Table  1  that  this  mixture  issue  was  poorly  addressed  in  almost  all 
studies, with the exception of Zhang et al. (2013). In particular, Zhang 
et al. (2013) monitored branched isomers of PFOA and estimated their 
half-lives.  This  study  showed  little  variation  between  the  estimated 
half-life of the linear isomer and that of the sum of all PFOA isomers 
including the linear isomer due principally to the small proportion of 
branched isomers in the mixture. Specifically, a geometric mean PFOA 
half-life of 1.3 years was evident for both along with a median PFOA 
half-life of approximately 1.8 years for both. However, the geometric 
mean and median half-lives of the 4m- and 5m-PFOA branched isomers 
were  commonly  40–70%  lower  than  the  linear  isomer  (Zhang  et  al., 
2013). Uncertainties due to lack of isomer characterization were present 
in the estimated PFOA half-lives in many of the other studies. Similarly 
designed studies as  Zhang et al. (2013) could shed more light on the 
range of half-lives for PFOA isomers, both straight and branched. The 
Collaboration did not uncover any additional hypotheses beyond those 
reported  by  Beesoon  and  Martin  (2015)  that  would  account  for  the 
quicker half-lives of branched isomers when compared with the straight 
chain.  However,  it  was  recognized  that  this  information  would  be  of 
great use in human health risk assessment given the reports of differ-
ential  biological  and  environmental  transport  and  fate  properties  be-
tween linear and branched PFOA (Benskin et al., 2009; De Silva et al., 
2009; Schulz et al., 2020). 

Studies  from  Table  1  considered  by  the  Collaboration  to  have  the 
least  amount  of  uncertainty  with  unmonitored  PFOA  exposures  and 
isomer accountability are shown in Table 2. The first study by Elcombe 
et al. (2013) was used by Dourson and Gadagbui (2021) to estimate a 
half-life  of  0.5  years  based  on  3  individuals  who  were  monitored 
extensively  over  6  weeks  in  this  clinical  trial  of  PFOA  given  as  a 
chemotherapeutic  drug.  This  study  had  the  advantage  of  a  dose  high 
enough  to  avoid  problems  with  unmonitored  PFOA  exposures  and 
avoided branched-chain PFOA isomers since the administered PFOA was 
straight chain. The half-life in this study was also determined from PFOA 
serum concentrations that were at or lower than the estimated human 

4  From  EPA  Method  533:  “A  quantitative  standard  for  PFOA  is  currently 
available only for the linear isomer; however, a technical grade standard (Sect. 
3.22)  is  available  for  PFOA  that  contains  the  linear  and  branched  isomers 
(Wellington  Labs,  Cat.  No.  T-PFOA,  or  equivalent).  This  product  or  a  similar 
technical-grade PFOA standard must be used to identify the retention times of 
the  branched  and  linear  PFOA  isomers. However,  the  linear-only  PFOA  stan-
dard  must  be  used  for  quantitation  until  a  quantitative  PFOA  standard  con-
taining the branched and linear isomers becomes commercially available.”  

5  From  the  U.S.  Department  of  Defense  and  Department  of  Energy  (2019) 
Quality  Systems  Manual  (QSM)  for  Environmental  Laboratories:  “Standards 
containing both branched and linear isomers must be used when commercially 
available. PFAS method analytes may consist of both branched and linear iso-
mers, but quantitative standards that contain the linear and branched isomers 
do not exist for all method analytes. For PFAS that do not have a quantitative 
branched  and  linear  standard,  identify  the  branched  isomers  by  analyzing  a 
qualitative  standard  that  includes  both  linear  and  branched  isomers  and 
determine  retention  times,  transitions  and  transition  ion  ratios.  Quantitate 
samples by integrating the total response (i.e., accounting for peaks that 
are identified as linear and branched isomers) and relying on the initial 
calibration  that  uses  the  linear  isomer  quantitative  standard  [emphasis 
added].” 

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051853J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Table 1 
Selected Studies with PFOA half-life estimates.  

Study population 

Reported Half-life 
(years)a 

Comments 

Dourson and Gadagbui (unpublished) 
Analysis of Nilsson et al. (2010) 

Elcombe et al. (2013) 

Xu et al. (2020) 

Airport employees in Sweden exposed to 
PFAS through airport’s waterworks 

Li et al. (2018) 

Community: 106 Swedes in Ronneby, 
Sweden, exposed to PFAS through 
contaminated municipal drinking water: 
2-year follow-up time 

Gomis et al. (2017) 

Population-based cross- sectional 
biomonitoring data from USA (NHANES, 
1999–2013) and Australia (2003–2011) 

Gomis et al. (2016) 

Ski waxers: 4 male technicians 
occupationally exposed to airborne particles 
and fumes from hot ski wax; followed after 
marked reduction of occupational exposure 

Zhang et al. (2013) 

General population: healthy volunteers in 
China 
N = 86 

Bartell et al. (2010) 

200 Americans (172 public water drinkers 
and 28 bottled water drinkers) 

AM = 0.9 
(+background) 
AM = 0.6 
(-background) 

AM 
0.5  

GM = 1.77 
(+background) 
GM = 1.48 
(-background)  
AM = 2.7  

Men: 
AM = USA 2.4; 
Australia 2.1 
Women: 
AM = USA 2.1; 
Australia 1.8  
AM = 2.4  

AM = 2.3 
GM = 1.7 
Median = 2.0 
Range (0.2–5.3) 
(young females, n =
20) 
AM = 2.8 
GM = 1.2 
Median = 1.8 
Range (0.1–16) 
(all males and older 
females, n = 66)  
Median = 2.3 (all) 
Median = 2.1 (group 
eating homegrown 
vegetables)  

Olsen et al. (2007) Occupational workers: 26 
retired fluorochemical production workers 

GM = 3.5  

• Based on the finding from 3 ski-waxers pre-
sumably exposed to PFOA via inhalation of 
airborne particles and fumes  

• Modestly high serum levels but below 
presumed renal resorption limit b  
• Too few individuals for GM estimation 
• Based on a new analysis of data from Elcombe 
et al. (2013) by Dourson and Gadagbui (2021) 
for 3 cancer patients  

• Patients received a single dose of PFOA with 6 
weeks of follow up with serum levels likely to 
be below level of saturation of renal 
resorption b 

• Alternate exposures were unlikely.  
• Small population (n = 17) and short follow up 

(5 months)  

• Exposures not greatly above background. 
• Exposures in water, food, dust, air, and 
household products not monitored.  

• Study assumed exposure levels in the general 
population from all sources were negligible 
but excluded outliers that suggested ongoing 
exposure greater than the background of the 
control population.  

• Geometric mean is likely smaller. 
• Study noted that background human 

exposure was likely dominated historically by 
consumer products.  

• Geometric mean is likely smaller. 

• Average reported as intrinsic (i.e., corrected 
for the ongoing background exposure from 
diet and drinks only.  

• Dermal exposure assumed negligible.  
• Geometric mean is likely smaller. 
• Study assumed volume of distribution of 170 

ml/kg.  

• Discussion of background or ongoing 

exposures or exposures were not needed since 
half-lives were based on renal clearance. 
• Study notes that half-lives should be consid-
ered as upper limit estimates since not all 
elimination routes were studied. 

• Water systems remained contaminated with 
PFOA to some extent for days to weeks after 
filtration began.  

• Study indicates their mean half-life is heavily 
influenced by the 12- month serum PFOA 
measurements and should be viewed as a 
preliminary estimate.  

• Geometric mean is likely smaller. 
• Study noted that it is unlikely that the 

potential for non-occupational exposures 
substantially distorted the elimination.  
• Study discussed other sources of exposure, 
but none was monitored in households of 
participants. 

Unmonitored Sources of 
PFOA Exposure 
Addressed? 

PFOA Half-life 
Accounted for 
Isomers? 

No, during off duty 
assumed background 
exposures only 

No, isomers were 
combined in 
analysis 

Not needed based on high 
dose given 

Not applicable, 
dosing was with 
linear isomer 

No, assumed only 
background exposures 
from the referent 
population 
No, assumed only 
background exposures 
from the referent 
population 

Not clear from 
description 

No, all isomers were 
combined 

No, modeling conducted 
on biomonitoring data 

No distinction was 
made among 
isomers 

No, during off duty 
assumed background 
exposures only 

No mention was 
made of isomers 

Not needed since study was 
based on estimated renal 
clearance 

Yes, separate 
analysis done on 
straight and 
branched chains 

No, assumed that “ongoing 
PFOA exposures only 
contribute negligible 
amounts” 

Not mentioned 

Mentioned as possible but 
not monitored 

Analysis done but 
separate half-lives 
not estimated  

a) AM = arithmetic mean; GM = geometric mean. 
b) Saturation of resorption is likely to occur at plasma concentrations above 10 μMoles/L, based on an estimated renal transporter Km of 4 μg/ml from an analysis of 

this clinical study of Elcombe et al. (2013) (Campbell et al., 2016; ARA, 2021). 

renal resorption limit of Km of 4 μg/ml. Saturation of resorption is only 
likely to occur at plasma concentrations above 10 μMoles/L, based on an 
estimated renal transporter Km of 4 μg/ml from an analysis of Elcombe 
et al. (2013) by Campbell et al. (2016). The Elcombe et al. (2013) study 
had the disadvantages that only a very small number of individuals (n =

3)  had  a  dose  that  was  not  expected  to  saturate  renal  resorption.  An 
estimate  of  PFOA  half-life  including  all  42  patients  might  shed  more 

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051854J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Table 2 
Studies selected with fewest issues of unmonitored sources of PFOA exposure, 
elimination, or isomer uncertainties.   

Study population 

Comments 

Reported 
Half-life 
(years)a 

Elcombe et al. 

(2013) 

AM 
0.5  

• Based on a new 
analysis of data 
from Elcombe 
et al. (2013) by 
Dourson and 
Gadagbui (2021) 
for 3 cancer 
patients  

• Patients received 
a single dose of 
PFOA with a 6 
week follow up 
with serum levels 
likely to be below 
level of 
saturation of 
renal resorption  

Exposure, Isomer or 
Elimination 
Uncertainty 

• High dose in 

Elcombe et al. 
(2013) obviates 
the need for 
monitoring of 
other PFOA 
exposures  

• Single isomer was 
studied in Elcombe 
et al. (2013), so no 
uncertainty exists 
with this issue 

Xu et al. (2020) 

GM = 1.5  

• Alternate 

• Other 

Airport 
employees in 
Sweden exposed 
to PFAS through 
airport’s 
waterworks 

Zhang et al. 
(2013) 
General 
population: 
healthy 
volunteers in 
China 
N = 86 

unmonitored 
exposures are 
possible, and if 
available would 
result in a lower 
intrinsic half-life.  
• Some uncertainty 

exists since 
branched PFOA 
isomers were 
studied in drinking 
water, but not 
reported in serum. 
• No uncertainty in 
unmonitored 
exposures since 
renal clearance 
studied  

• Unmonitored 
elimination by 
other routes was 
likely which, if 
measured would 
result in a lower 
half-life  

• Multiple isomers 
were individually 
studied so no 
uncertainty exists 
with this issue  

exposures were 
unlikely.  

• Small population 
(n = 17) and 5- 
month follow up  

• Exposures not 
greatly above 
background.  

• Study assumed 
volume of 
distribution of 
170 ml/kg.  
• Discussion of 

background or 
ongoing 
exposures or 
exposures were 
not needed since 
half-lives were 
based on renal 
clearance.  
• Study authors 
note that half- 
lives should be 
considered as 
upper limit esti-
mates since not 
all elimination 
routes were 
studied.  

GM = 1.7 
Median =
2.0 (young 
females, n =
20) 
GM = 1.2 
Median =
1.8 (all 
males and 
older 
females, n =
66) 
Central 
tendency 
GM = 1.3 
Median =
1.8  

light from this unique study. A potential additional problem with using 
this study for estimating a PFOA half-life is its relatively short duration 
of 6 weeks.6 

The second study by Xu et al. (2020) showed a half-life geometric 
mean  of  ~1.5  years  based  on  a  human  observational  study  of  17  in-
dividuals monitored frequently over 5 months from a likely single source 
of PFOA exposure. This study had the advantage of minimal additional 
sources of PFOA exposure, some measurement of PFOA branch isomers, 
and an estimate of background exposures from which a lower, and more 

appropriate  half-life  could  be  determined.  This  study  had  the  disad-
vantage of a small number of individuals and a rather short follow up 
time, but certainly both were better than that found in Elcombe et al. 
(2013).  Also,  although  this  study  measured  branched  PFOA  isomers, 
they were not clearly distinguished in the estimated PFOA half-life. 

The third study by Zhang et al. (2013) determined the PFOA half-life 
from estimates of renal clearance from 86 men and women of the gen-
eral Chinese population (aged 20–88 years) with no known point source 
of  exposure  to  PFOA.  Specifically,  the  half-life  geometric  mean  was 
estimated at 1.7 years in young females (n = 20) and 1.2 years in males 
of all ages and older females (n = 66). The combined geometric mean 
was 1.3 years. Median values of half-life were 2.0 years in young females 
and 1.8 years in males of all ages and older females, or 1.8 years when 
combined. Arithmetic mean values were not reliable since the clearance 
values formed a skewed right distribution. This study had the advantage 
of a half-life unencumbered by the problem of unmonitored PFOA ex-
posures, since clearance from the blood integrates all sources of expo-
sure.  Also,  PFOA  isomers  were  individually  quantified  and  separate 
estimates of isomer half-lives were given. This study had the disadvan-
tage that not all sources of elimination from the body were accounted 
for, leading the authors to suggest that the half-lives determined were 
likely upper limits. 

After extensive email discussions,7 the Collaboration then considered 
three options. Each scientist was asked to consider choosing a preferred 
option along with reasons for the choice. Scientists were also encour-
aged to indicate an option that could be lived with, but of course not 
preferred, and, if appropriate, to select an option that could not be lived 
with.  The  development  of  other  options  was  also  solicited.  Options 
considered were:  

• Select a single study to represent your best judgment of the PFOA 

half-life.  

• Select a range of the PFOA half-life from a small group of studies with 

or without a single value, such as those found in Table 2.  

• Select a range of the PFOA half-life from a larger group of studies 

with or without a single value, such as those found in Table 1. 

Scientists’ choices were sent to two members of the Advisory Com-
mittee in a confidential manner and responses were collated as shown in 
Table 3. Option 1 was preferred by the majority of scientists although 
several  of  those  voting  for  option  1  could  also  live  with  option  2.  A 
smaller number of scientists preferred option 2, with several of them also 
able to live with option 1. Option 3 was preferred by two scientists, with 
one able to live with this choice, judging that the choice  of only one 
study (as in option 1), or even of a few studies (as in option 2), was not 
sufficiently supportable at this point in the investigation. 

During the course of this Collaboration three additional items were 
discussed. First, the question of the appropriate averaging value for the 
PFOA half-life arose. Several studies give the half-life as the geometric 
mean, the arithmetic mean, or the median value. Zhang et al. (2013) 
showed  that  arithmetic  mean  half-lives  based  on  arithmetic  mean 
clearances did not match arithmetic mean half-lives based on individual 
clearances. In contrast, the estimation of geometric mean half-lives from 
either  geometric  mean  clearance  or  individual  geometric  mean  clear-
ance did not differ to the same degree. This is because the distribution of 
individual  clearances  and  corresponding  half-lives  were  found  to  be 
skewed right (Zhang et al., 2013; ARA, 2021). Based on this finding, the 
Collaboration  considered  the  geometric  mean  to  be  superior  to  the 
arithmetic mean, and that the medians can add value to this range of 
central tendency. 

Second, the estimation of the volume of distribution was discussed. 

6  Some  might  posit  that  the  individuals  in  this  study  were  sick  so  that  the 
elimination measured in these individuals may not relate to the general pop-
ulation, but clinical measures in study individuals demonstrated normal liver 
and kidney function (Smith, 2021). 

7  A summary of these email discussions can be found at: https://tera.org/Alli 
ance%20for%20Risk/Projects/PFOA%20Groups/ARA_2021_Questions_%20Dis 
cussion_on_SGSummaries_Fall%20_of_2021.pdf. 

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051855J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

In  some  studies,  the  volume  of  distribution  was  based  on  measured 
PFOA  exposures  in  humans,  but  such  estimations  would  be  inappro-
priately  low  if  unmonitored  sources  of  exposure  are  occurring.  Other 
studies or analyses estimated the volume of distribution from a small 
population of humans in a clinical trial where PFOA was used as a cancer 
chemotherapeutic drug and in subjects in whom the kinetics of PFOA 
may  or  may  not  represent  that  expected  in  the  general  population 
(Elcombe et al., 2013). Other investigators selected a volume of distri-
bution from either a small group of monkeys (n = 3) by Butenhoff et al. 
(2004) or from other experimental animals. Selecting one value for the 
volume  of  distribution  from  this  assortment  of  values  is  challenging 
given these different approaches. However, a value of around 0.18 L/kg 
body weight was considered by the Collaboration to approximate the 
likely value in humans. 

Finally, some studies showed indications of the potential range for 
inter-individual variability in PFOA clearance. In particular, instances of 
blood loss and replacement appeared to lead to faster elimination, as the 
lost blood removes part of the PFOA body burden and is replaced by 
blood  without  added  burden.  This  includes  menstrual  blood  loss  and 
episodes  of  blood  donation.  Pregnancy  and  breastfeeding  may  also 
diminish body burden, although that burden is transferred to the fetus 
and  infant,  respectively. Observations  of  somewhat faster  elimination 
among reproductive-age women in some studies appeared to be expli-
cable by menstrual and childbirth loss. The possible role of nutritional 
differences among people, perhaps through an effect on fatty acid up-
take, was also suggested in some studies but has not been clearly char-
acterized. The Collaboration encourages additional research in this area. 

4. Discussion 

This Collaboration was an attempt to bridge the rather large differ-
ences  in  estimated  PFOA  half-lives,  ranging  from  1.2  to  14.9  years, 
shown by a number of investigators (e.g., Dourson and Gadagbui, 2021). 
The  ARA  Steering  Committee  invited  a  wide  participation  in  the  de-
liberations and discussions by an active list of over  100 international 
colleagues from government, industry, academia and consulting, whom 
received periodic summary emails, and several social media postings to 
over 4000 individuals. The effort lasted the better part of 6 months and 
included scientists from various sectors and countries. 

The Collaboration’s majority opinion is that the study with the least 
encumbrances  to  determine  the  PFOA  half-life  is  that  of  Zhang  et  al. 
(2013)  with  a  geometric  mean  value  of  1.3  years  as  in  Option  1  of 
Table 3. Eight members preferred this option and two members could 
live  with  it.  Four  participants  preferred  Option  2  of  Table  3  with  a 
half-life range of central tendency of between 0.5 and 1.5 years and six 
participants could live with that option. It is possible that the lower part 
of this range of central tendency might increase with the close moni-
toring of additional individuals. It is also possible that the upper part of 
this  range  might  decrease  if  additional  information  is  provided  on 
possible unmonitored exposures or elimination. Regardless, this range of 
central  tendency  not  exceeding  2  years  is  a  challenge  to  the  ongoing 
convention that the half-life is in multiple years. Finally, two scientists 

Table 3 
Results from consensus polling of the international group.  

Option 

Preferred 

8 

4* 

1 (single 
study) 
2 (small 

group of 
studies) 

3 (larger 

2 

group of 
studies) 

Can 
live 
with 

2 

6 

1 

Cannot 
live with 

Comments 

1 

1 

2 

Zhang et al. (2013) 

As in Table 2. *One vote 
with a special emphasis on  
Zhang et al. (2013) 
As in Table 1.  

opined  for  Option  3  of  Table  3  and  one  could  live  with  this  choice, 
suggesting that while the fewer studies of Options 1 and 2 minimized 
uncertainties from background exposures and branched isomers, these 
studies also had limitations in terms of cohort size and or representation 
of various populations; thus, other studies as in Option 3 are useful for 
highlighting  the  inter-individual  variability  in  the  half-life  estimate 
among members of the different cohorts. 

Perhaps  most  important,  in  the  course  of  this  Collaboration,  two 
uncertainties in the conventional thinking that the PFOA half-life is in 
multiple years became more clear, specifically:  

• The  uncertainty  in  the  amount  of  unmonitored  PFOA  exposures, 
including precursors, expressed by nearly all authors in most studies, 
and  

• The  uncertainty  in  PFOA  half-life  estimates  due  to  the  unknown 
proportion  of  branched-chain  isomers  versus  straight  chain  in  the 
measured PFOA exposures. 

The first uncertainty will inflate PFOA half-life estimates, the extent 
of which could be determined by estimating the percent of unmonitored 
PFOA exposures when compared with total PFOA exposure and using 
the time between measurements to determine a downward adjustment 
to the PFOA half-life as per Bartell (2012). That this first uncertainty is 
likely occurring is evident in recent deliberations by the U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency (2021) where the contribution of PFOA from 
water  sources  in  communities  that  do  not  have  considerable  water 
contamination could be around 10% overall.8 

The second uncertainty deflates PFOA half-live estimates due to the 
fact that branched isomers of PFOA are eliminated more quickly than 
PFOA’s  straight-chain,  the  extent  of  which  would  be  determined  by 
estimating the percent of branched PFOA isomers when compared with 
total PFOA (see Zhang et al., 2013 for an example of this determination). 
Although these two uncertainties work in opposite directions, the extent 
of  these  changes  together  is  not  knowable  in  most  of  these  studies 
without additional investigation of the PFOA mixture of interest. 

Among the studies reviewed by the Collaboration, the study that is 
least  encumbered  by  uncertainties  from  background  exposures  and 
PFOA  isomers  appears  to  be  that  of  Zhang  et  al.  (2013).  The  in-
vestigators estimated renal clearance values of several PFAS, including 
PFOA and  several  of its  branched  isomers,  by  using paired  urine and 
serum measurements. The use of paired measurements in this way does 
not depend on determining sources of PFOA in the environment, since 
the  blood  serum  concentration  integrates  all  exposures.  Thus,  uncer-
tainty in potential unmonitored PFOA sources is minimal in this study. 
However, clearance values in this study depended on determining total 
PFOA excreted, which the authors acknowledged was not done, which 
led them to suggest that their stated half-life values were upper limits.9 
Research should continue to determine the proportion of PFOA that is 
excreted in human urine versus other routes of human elimination, such 
as feces, hair, sweat, bile, menstruation, and breast-feeding. This might 
enable a change to the half-life proposed by Zhang et al. (2013). 

8  Schulz et al. (2020) cites Hu et al. (2019), East et al. (2021), and Gebbink 
et  al. (2015)  providing evidence that drinking  water only  accounts for about 
10%  of  the  total  PFOA  exposures  at  both  low-  and  high-exposure  scenarios, 
with house dust and diet being the primary sources. For example, the results 
below are from Gebbink et al. (2015):o Low-exposure scenario: diet (~50%) >
air  (~25%)  > dust  (~15%)  > water  (~10%);  o  Intermediate-exposure  sce-
nario:  diet  (~45%)  > dust  (~35%)  > water  (~10%)  ≈ air  (~10%);  o 
High-exposure  scenario:  dust  (~65%)  > diet  (~20%)  > water  (10%)  > air 
(~5%).  

9  Vanden Heuvel et al. (1991) reported differences in fecal excretion between 
female and male rats and that the extent to which humans eliminate PFOA in 
urine versus feces is not known. If there is significant fecal excretion of PFOA in 
the  human,  the  intrinsic  PFOA  half-life  would  actually  be  shorter  than  that 
estimated on the basis of renal clearance, as in Zhang et al. (2013). 

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051856J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

The two other studies in Table 2 also avoid these two uncertainties to 
some extent, although both of thems also have some uncertainties. The 
clinical study by Elcombe et al. (2013) yields a lower half-life of ~0.5 
years as determined by Dourson and Gadagbui (2021) based on three, 
low, single dose patients. However, a similar analysis of 3 healthy in-
dividuals from the study of Nilsson et al. (2010) shows a similar half-life, 
~0.5 years, after exposure ceased and the background PFOA exposure is 
subtracted, as shown in Appendix Fig. 1. 

The  second  study  in  Table  2,  Xu  et  al.  (2020),  yields  a  geometric 
mean half-life of 1.5 years based on 17 individuals with longer follow up 
time than the Elcombe et al. (2013) study, and likely single dominant 
source  of  exposure  similar  to  this  latter  study.  Xu  et  al.  (2020)  also 
subtract  background  exposures,  which  ends  up  lowering  their  unad-
justed half-life significantly, from 1.77 to 1.48 years. 

A good number of studies reviewed by the Collaboration (Table 1) 
are  well-conducted  and  adjust  for  background  exposures  and  other 
sources of bias. They might extend the range of central tendency of half- 
lives  identified  in  the minimally  encumbered  studies. However, there 
remain  data  that  are  not  presented  or  are  unknown  relating  to  back-
ground  exposures  and  branched  PFOA  isomers.  Additional  efforts  to 
extend this work might include a meta-analysis of selected studies after a 
follow  up  with  authors  for  individual  data  to  determine  potentially 
unmonitored  exposures  and  branched-chain  isomers.  This  area  of 
research may also benefit from additional clearance studies, like Zhang 
et al. (2013), for confirmation. 

Disclaimers 

The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Department of the 
Navy,  Department  of  Defense,  nor  the  U.S.  Government.  JS  is  an 
employee of the U.S. Government. This work was prepared as part of his 
official duties. Title 17, U.S.C., §105 provides that copyright protection 
under this title is not available for any work of the U.S. Government. 
Title 17, U.S.C., §101 defines a U.S. Government work as a work pre-
pared by a military Service member or employee of the U.S. Government 
as part of that person’s official duties. 

The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Oregon Health 
Authority. 

RP and LR are employees of Gradient, a consulting firm serving a 
variety  of  clients  in  the  private  and  public  sector.  Gradient  has  per-
formed consulting and testifying work on matters involving PFAS. None 
of the sponsors of those projects had any involvement with the present 
work,  and  no  input  into  the  design,  conduct,  or  preparation  of  this 
report, nor did the sponsors review the report prior to publication. The 
time spent on this manuscript was either sponsored by Gradient or was 
performed on the author’s own time. 

NF is an employee of Arcadis U.S., Inc., a consulting firm serving a 
variety of clients in the private and public sector. Arcadis has performed 
consulting and testifying work on matters involving PFAS. None of the 
sponsors of those projects had any involvement with the present work, 
and no input into the design, conduct, or preparation of this report, nor 
did the sponsors review the report prior to publication. The time spent 
on this manuscript was either sponsored by Arcadis or was performed on 
the author’s own time. 

MD  and  BG  are  employees  of  Toxicology  Excellence  for  Risk 

Assessment  (TERA)  that  has  worked  over  a  number  of  years  for  gov-
ernment  and  nongovernment  sponsors  on  PFAS  issues.  However,  no 
outside funding was accepted to do this work. 

Unlisted references 

Beesoon et al. (2015); Energy’s (2019); James Smith, 2021. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Jerry Campbell: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. 
Harvey  Clewell:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. 
Tony Cox: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investi-
gation,  Methodology, Visualization,  Writing  –  review &  editing, sum-
marized  confidential  voting.  Michael  Dourson:  Conceptualization, 
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualiza-
tion,  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Project  administration.  Shannon 
Ethridge:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investi-
gation,  Methodology,  Visualization,  Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Nor-
man  Forsberg:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. 
Bernard Gadagbui: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. 
Ali  Hamade:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. 
Ravi Naidu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Inves-
tigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing, sum-
marized  confidential  voting.  Nathan  Pechacek:  Conceptualization, 
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualiza-
tion, Writing –  review &  editing. Tiago Severo Peixe: Conceptualiza-
tion,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investigation,  Methodology, 
Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Robyn Prueitt: Conceptual-
ization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investigation,  Methodology, 
Visualization,  Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Mahesh  Rachamalla: 
Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investigation, 
Methodology,  Visualization,  Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Lorenz 
Rhomberg:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Inves-
tigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. James 
Smith:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investiga-
tion,  Methodology,  Visualization,  Writing  –  review  &  editing.  Nitin 
Verma:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investiga-
tion, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgements 

The development of research and subsequent publication was under 
the auspices of the Alliance for Risk Assessment (ARA). No funding was 
accepted from any organization to do this work.  

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051857J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Appendix

References 

Alliance for Risk Assessment (ARA), 2021. Beyond science and Decisions workshop XII. 
Meeting report available at. https://tera.org/Alliance%20for%20Risk/Workshop% 
20Xll/Final%20Report.pdf. 

Bartell, S., 2012. Bias in half-life estimates using log concentration regression in the 

presence of background exposures, and potential solutions. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. 
Epidemiol. 22, 299–303. 

Bartell, S.M., Calafat, A.M., Lyu, C., Kato, K., Ryan, P.B., Steenland, K., 2010. Rate of 
decline in serum PFOA concentrations after granular activated carbon filtration at 
two public water systems in Ohio and West Virginia. Environ. Health Perspect. 118 
(2), 222–228. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901252. PMID: 20123620.  

Beesoon, S., Martin, J.W., 2015. Isomer-specific binding affinity of 

perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) to serum proteins. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 49 (9), 5722–5731. 

Benskin, J.P., De Silva, A.O., Martin, L.J., Arsenault, G., McCrindle, R., Riddell, N., 
Mabury, S.A., Martin, J.W., 2009. Disposition of perfluorinated acid isomers in 
sprague-dawley rats; Part 1: single dose. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 28 (3), 542–554. 
Butenhoff, J.L., Kennedy Jr., G.L., Hinderliter, P.M., Lieder, P.H., Jung, R., Hansen, K.J., 

Gorman, G.S., Noker, P.E., Thomford, P.J., 2004. Pharmacokinetics of 
perfluorooctanoate in cynomolgus monkeys. Toxicol. Sci. 82 (2), 394–406. https:// 
doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfh302. 

Campbell, J., Allen, B., Olsen, G., Elcombe, C., Doyle, E., Evans, J., Clewell, H., 2016. 

Evaluation of the short-term clearance of perflourooctanoic acid (PFOA) in a clinical 
trial using a PBPK model and Markov chain Monte Carlo analysis. In: Poster at the 
Society of Toxicology Annual Meeting. 

De Silva, A.O., Benskin, J.P., Martin, L.J., Arsenault, G., McCrindle, R., Riddell, N., 
Martin, J.W., Mabury, S.A., 2009. Disposition of perfluorinated acid isomers in 
sprague-dawley rats; Part 2: subchronic dose. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 28 (3), 
555–567. 

De Silva, A.O., Armitage, J.M., Bruton, T.A., Dassuncao, C., Heiger-Bernays, W., Hu, X.C., 
K¨arrman, A., Kelly, B., Ng, C., Robuck, A., Sun, M., Webster, T.F., Sunderland, E.M., 
2020. PFAS exposure pathways for humans and wildlife: a synthesis of current 
knowledge and key gaps in understanding. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 40 (3), 631–657. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4935. 

Dourson, M.L., Gadagbui, B., Onyema, C., McGinnis, P.M., York, R.G., 2019. Data 

derived extrapolation factors for developmental toxicity: a preliminary research case 
study with perfluorooctanoate (PFOA). Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacology 108, 104446. 

Dourson, M., Gadagbui, B., 2021. The dilemma of perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) human 

half-life. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacology 126, 105025. 

Drinking Water Inspectorate, 2021. Guidance on the Water Supply (Water Quality) 
Regulations 20161 Specific to PFOS (Perfluorooctane Sulphonate) and PFOA 
(Perfluorooctanoic Acid) Concentrations in Drinking Water (London, UK).  

East, A., Egeghy, P.P., Hubal, E., Slover, R., Vallero, D.A., 2021. Computational estimates 
of daily aggregate exposure to PFOA/PFOS from 2011 to 2017 using a basic intake 

model. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol Online ahead of print na (na), na–na. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41370-021-00374-w. 

Elcombe, C.R., Wolf, C.R., Westwood, A.L., 2013. US patent application publication. Pub. 
No.: US 2013/0029928. Available at: https://patentimages.storage.googleapis. 
Com/24/ee/73/f58267c7d70dde/WO2011101643A1.pdf. 

Gebbink, W.A., Berger, U., Cousins, I.T., 2015. Estimating human exposure to PFOS 
isomers and PFCA homologues: the relative importance of direct and indirect 
(precursor) exposure. Environ. Int. 74, 160–169. 

Gomis, M.I., Vestergren, R., MacLeod, M., Mueller, J.F., Cousins, I.T., 2017. Historical 

human exposure to perfluoroalkyl acids in the United States and Australia 
reconstructed from biomonitoring data using population-based pharmacokinetic 
modelling. Environ. Int. 108, 92–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envint.2017.08.002. 

Gomis, M.I., Vestergren, R., Nilsson, H., Cousins, I.T., 2016. Contribution of direct and 

indirect exposure to human serum concentrations of perfluorooctanoic acid in an 
occupationally exposed group of ski waxers. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50 (13), 
7037–7046. 

Hu, Y., Liu, G., Rood, J., Liang, L., Bray, G.A., de Jonge, L., Coull, B., Furtado, J.D., Qi, L., 
Grandjean, P., Sun, Q., 2019. Perfluoroalkyl substances and changes in bone mineral 
density: a prospective analysis in the POUNDS-LOST study. Environ. Res. 179, 
108775. 

Li, Y., Fletcher, T., Mucs, D., Scott, K., Lindh, C.H., Tallving, P., Jakobsson, K., 2018. 

Half-lives of PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA after end of exposure to contaminated drinking 
water. Occup. Environ. Med. 75 (1), 46–51. https://doi.org/10.1136/oemed-2017- 
104651. PMID: 29133598.  

Mikkonen, A.T., Martin, J., Dourson, M.L., Hinwood, A., Johnson, M.S., 2021. 

Suggestions for improving the characterisation of risk from exposures to per and 
polyfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS). Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 40, 883–898. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4931. 

Nilsson, H., Karrman, A., Westberg, H., Rotander, A., Van Bavel, B., Lindstrom, G., 2010. 
A time trend study of significantly elevated perfluorocarboxylate levels in humans 
after using fluorinated ski wax. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44, 2150–2155. 

Olsen, G.W., Burris, J.M., Ehresman, D.J., Froehlich, J.W., Seacat, A.M., Butenhoff, J.L., 
Zobel, L.R., 2007. Half-life of serum elimination of perfluorooctanesulfonate, 
perfluorohexanesulfonate, and perfluorooctanoate in retired fluorochemical 
production workers. Environ. Health Perspect. 115 (9), 1298–1305. https://doi.org/ 
10.1289/ehp.10009. PMID: 17805419.  

Russell, M.H., Waterland, R.L., Wong, F., 2015. Calculation of chemical elimination 

halflife from blood with an ongoing exposure source: the example of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). Chemosphere 129, 210–216. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.07.061. PMID: 25149361.  

Schulz, K., Silva, M.R., Klaper, R., 2020. Distribution and effects of branched versus 

linear isomers of PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS: a review of recent literature. Sci. Total 
Environ. 733, 139186. 

Smith, James, 2021. 2021. Personal communication between Geary Olsen and James 

Smith. not applicable. 

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051858J. Campbell et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

U.S. Department of Defense and Department of Energy, 2019. Consolidated quality 
systems manual (QSM) for environmental Laboratories (ver. 5.3). Available at: 
https://denix.osd.mil/edqw/documents/manuals/qsm-version-5-3-final/. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2021. EXTERNAL PEER REVIEW DRAFT: 

Proposed Approaches to the Derivation of a Draft Maximum Contaminant Level Goal 
for Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) (CASRN 335-67-1) in Drinking Water. EPA 
Document No. 822 D21001.  

Vanden Heuvel, J.P., Kuslikis, B.I., Van Rafelghem, M.J., Peterson, R.E., 1991. Tissue 

distribution, metabolism, and elimination of perfluorooctanoic acid in male and 

female rats. J. Biochem. Toxicol. 6 (2), 83–92. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
jbt.2570060202. PMID: 1941903.  

Xu, Y., Fletcher, T., Pineda, D., Lindh, C.H., Nilsson, C., Glynn, A., Vogs, C., Norstr¨om, K., 
Lilja, K., Jakobsson, K., Li, Y., 2020. Serum half-lives for short- and long-chain 
perfluoroalkyl acids after ceasing exposure from drinking water contaminated by 
firefighting foam. Environ. Health Perspect. 28 (7) https://doi.org/10.1289/ 
EHP6785. CID: 077004.  

Zhang, Y., Beesoon, S., Zhu, L., Martin, J.W., 2013. Biomonitoring of perfluoroalkyl acids 
in human urine and estimates of biological half-life. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (18), 
10619–10627. https://doi.org/10.1021/es401905e. PMID: 23980546.  

RegulatoryToxicologyandPharmacology132(2022)1051859