Group A Public Water Supplies • Chapter 246-290 WAC
Recommended State Action Levels for
Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances
(PFAS) in Drinking Water:
Approach, Methods, and Supporting
Information
331-673 • Revised November 1, 2021




                   Prepared by
        Washington Department of Health
  Office of Environmental Public Health Sciences,
 Technical Contact: Barbara Morrissey, Toxicologist




                         1
Table of Contents
Glossary .......................................................................................................................................... 3
Summary ........................................................................................................................................ 6
Background .................................................................................................................................... 7
Introduction to Approach and Methods ................................................................................... 13
Supporting Information―How We Derived Each SAL ........................................................... 26
   Deriving the State Action Level for PFOA ...................................................................................................... 27
   Deriving the State Action Level for PFOS ....................................................................................................... 39
   Deriving the State Action Level for PFNA....................................................................................................... 51
   Deriving the State Action Level for PFHxS ..................................................................................................... 63
   Deriving the State Action Level for PFBS ........................................................................................................ 73
References .................................................................................................................................... 82




                                                                          2
Glossary
ADD               Acceptable Daily Dose. An estimated maximum daily dose of a chemical (in
                  mg/kg-day) that can be consumed by humans for an entire lifetime without
                  adverse effects. Health protective value derived by CA OEHHA.
ATSDR             Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/index
BMD               Benchmark Dose modeled on the dose-response data from one or more
                  studies. A BMD5 is a modelled estimate of a 5 percent change in the effect.
BMDL              Benchmark Dose Lower Bound is the lower bound of the 95 percent
                  confidence interval in benchmark dose modelling.
CA OEHHA          The California Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Environmental
                  Health Hazard Assessment.
Critical Effect   The most sensitive adverse effect from human clinical or epidemiological
                  studies or the most sensitive outcome in animal studies deemed relevant to
                  adverse outcomes in humans.
Critical Study    The study that best identifies the lowest dose at which these effects first occur
                  or the no observable effect level.
EPA               U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
LOD               Limit of detection for laboratory analysis.
LOAEL             Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level is the lowest administered dose in an
                  experiment with an observed adverse effect.
LOEL              Lowest Observed Effect Level is the lowest administered dose in an
                  experiment with an observed effect, including effects that are not clearly
                  adverse.
MDH               Minnesota Department of Health
MDHHS             Michigan Department of Health and Human Services
MCL               Maximum Contaminant Level is the highest concentration of a regulated
                  contaminant allowed in drinking water by the Safe Drinking Water Act. An
                  MCL is a legally enforceable standard that applies to public water systems. It
                  is set as close to the MCLG as feasible.
MCLG              Maximum Contaminant Level Goal is a concentration in drinking water
                  generally considered safe under the Safe Drinking Water Act. The MCLG of
                  carcinogens is generally set at zero. The MCLG of non-cancer effects are
                  calculated by dividing the RfD by an upper-bound drinking water intake rate
                  and multiplying by a relative source contribution.



                                                3
mg/kg-day   Milligrams of chemical per kilogram body weight per day.
mg/L        Milligrams of chemical per liter. Equivalent to parts per million (or ppm).
MRL         Minimal Risk Level is an estimate of the amount of a chemical a person can
            eat, drink, or breathe each day without a detectable risk to health. MRLs are
            developed for non-cancer endpoints.
MSWG        Michigan Science Advisory Workgroup. An appointed group of toxicology,
            epidemiology and risk assessment experts that recommended health-based
            drinking water values for PFAS in Michigan.
NTP         National Toxicology Program, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
NHDES       New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
ng/kg-day   Nanograms of chemical per kilogram body weight per day.
ng/L        Nanograms of chemical per liter. Equivalent to parts per trillion (or ppt).
NJ DWQI     New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, the scientific body that evaluated
            PFAS risks and developed recommendations for drinking water standards for
            the State of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NOAEL       No Observed Adverse Effect Level is the highest administered dose in an
            experiment with no observed adverse effects.
PFBS        Perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (anion: perfluorobutane sulfonate)
PFHxS       Perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (anion: perfluorohexane sulfonate)
PFOA        Perfluorooctanoic acid also known as C8 (anion: perfluorooctanoate)
PFOS        Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (anion: perfluorooctane sulfonate)
PFNA        Perfluorononanoic acid (anion: perfluorononanoate)
POD         Point of Departure. The NOAEL, LOAEL or benchmark dose that defines the
            minimal or no effect level in animals in the critical study. For PFBS, this was a
            dose in mg/kg-day. For the other PFAS, it was a serum level in mg/L.
PPAR        Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptors are nuclear receptors that
            regulate many genes. There are several subtypes including alpha (α) and
            gamma (γ).
RfD         An oral Reference Dose is an estimate of a daily oral intake not anticipated to
            cause adverse health effects over a lifetime (including in sensitive subgroups).
            RfDs are developed for non-cancer endpoints.
RSC         The Relative Source Contribution is the proportion of the RfD allocated to
            come from drinking water sources under the Safe Drinking Water Act.




                                          4
Steady state   PFAS risk assessors use predictive models to estimate average serum levels in
               a population with PFAS in their daily drinking water. These models predict
               that in adults exposed daily over many years, serum levels will rise until the
               serum level reaches a plateau. This plateau is called steady state. See figure 3.
Target serum   The serum level (internal dose) at the RfD in µg/L. For PFOA, PFOS, PFNA and
               PFHxS this equals the serum concentration in rodents from the critical study
               at the point of departure divided by the uncertainty factors. This is not a
               clinical or diagnostic value and should not be interpreted as such.
T4             Thyroxine is a hormone the thyroid gland produces and releases into the
               blood. It converts to T3 in cells. Most circulating T4 is bound to transport
               proteins. The small fraction of unbound and biologically active T4 is called
               free T4 (fT4). The sum of bound and unbound T4 is called total T4 or tT4.
T3             Triiodothyronine is a thyroid hormone three to five times more active than T4.
               It stimulates metabolism and is critical to growth and differentiation of cells
               and tissues. T3 measurements may target the fraction of free fT3 or the total
               of bound and free T3 (tT3).
TSH            Thyroid-stimulating hormone is a hormone produced in the pituitary gland
               that stimulates the thyroid gland to produce T4.
TWA            Time-Weighted Average is the average concentration of a substance over a
               specified amount of time.
µ/L            Micrograms of chemical per liter. Equivalent to parts per billion (or ppb).




                                             5
Summary
In October 2017, the State Board of Health (board) accepted a petition from ten organizations to
establish drinking water standards for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Board
authority to adopt such standards comes under RCW 43.20.050(2), RCW 70.119.080(1), and RCW
70.142.010.
To support the board, the Washington Department of Health (department) released draft state
action levels (SALs) for five PFAS in November 2019. These PFAS occur in Washington drinking
water and had sufficient scientific information to recommend a value. We presented the draft
rule language at stakeholder workshops and at numerous meetings with stakeholders. After
evaluating the feedback from these events and from two public comment periods, we updated
our technical document and lowered our recommendation for the PFBS SAL from 1,300 to 345
ng/L to better protect infants. We also revised the PFNA SAL from 14 to 9 ng/L based on new
evidence of serum half-life in humans. The PFHxS SAL was revised slightly to correct our
calculation of average maternal body weight used in the infant exposure model. The revised SAL
values are part of the proposed rule being considered for adoption by the State Board of Health
in 2021.
The recommended SALs for PFOA, PFOS, PFNA, PFHxS, and PFBS are shown in Table 1. The
department developed these recommended values after evaluating primary scientific literature
on PFAS and reviewing health protective values in recent toxicological assessments by U.S.
federal and state agencies. The health protective values we selected are based on immune,
developmental and thyroid hormone effects observed in toxicity testing in laboratory animals.
While epidemiological data were not used quantitatively to derive these values, they were
considered as part of the evidence base.
The SALs were calculated like a maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) under the Safe
Drinking Water Act. They assume that 20-50 percent of the daily acceptable exposure can come
from a drinking water source. Because four of these PFAS are highly bioaccumulative, we used a
model to estimate accumulated exposure over many years of drinking water consumption.
Specifically, we used a model developed by the Minnesota Department of Health, to estimate
age-specific exposure to PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, and PFHxS when they occur in community drinking
water. This model accounts for maternal transfer of PFAS to the growing child at the time of
birth and during breastfeeding.
The SALs represent the maximum level in tap water that we consider to be without health
concern for long-term consumption in daily drinking water. The SALs were developed to
specifically protect early life stages of development (fetal, infancy) because these periods of
rapid development are potentially more susceptible to adverse effects of these PFAS, and infants
have relatively high exposure to contaminants in drinking water. Acting at these levels is
consistent with the mission of providing safe and reliable drinking water and consistent with the
SDWA.


                                               6
                    Table 1 Recommended State Action Levels (SALs) for
               Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in Drinking Water
                                                                       CAS# for
          Individual PFAS            State Action Level              Test Analyte
               PFOA                     10 ng/L                      335-67-1
                PFOS                    15 ng/L                 1763-23-1, as acid
                PFNA                     9 ng/L                      375-95-1
               PFHxS                    65 ng/L                  355-46-4, as acid
                PFBS                   345 ng/L                  375-73-5, as acid


PFAS are frequently detected as mixtures in drinking water. We did not identify sufficient
toxicological information to provide science-based health protective values for mixtures of PFAS.
PFAS mixtures detected in Washington drinking water to date have nearly always included one
of the five PFAS with a SAL. As such they should serve as indicators of drinking water impacted
by a PFAS source. When water systems employ mitigation to remove PFAS from a water source,
we encourage them to employ broad approaches that effectively remove many PFAS.
Combining a science-based level for state action with a broad management approach to PFAS
mitigation provides a reasonable interim approach to protect the public from PFAS mixtures in
drinking water.
Ultimately, a more comprehensive, grouped approach to regulation is preferred to a chemical-
by-chemical approach given the large size of the PFAS class of chemicals and the frequent
detections of PFAS mixtures in environmental media, food, and drinking water. As science
advances, PFAS could be grouped in subclasses based on key characteristics, such as chemical
structure, bioavailability, bioaccumulation potential, toxicity, or mechanism of action. We use
this type of grouped approach to regulate other complex mixtures, such as PCBs, dioxins, PAHs
and total petroleum hydrocarbons. We will continue to monitor progress and consider adopting
a broader grouped approach to regulating PFAS mixtures as the science and methodology
evolve.


Background
PFAS impact drinking water supplies in several areas of our state.
Limited testing in our state shows PFAS contamination in drinking water supplies in the areas
shown in Figure 1. In several of these areas, the levels of PFOA+PFOS exceeded the current EPA
health advisory level of 70 ng/L in drinking water. In response, public water systems and the
military have taken voluntary action to provide alternate drinking water or bring concentrations
in tap water below the federal advisory level.[1] Two sites in central Washington have detected
PFAS in groundwater monitoring wells not drinking water wells. The State Board of Health rule




                                                  7
under consideration would expand testing of public water systems and may uncover additional
impacted areas.




           Known areas of PFAS occurrence in drinking water supplies in WA State




Figure 1. Known areas of PFAS occurrence in drinking water supplies in WA State, as of October 2021. The
size of the dot indicates the publicly reported concentration of PFOS + PFOA. Other PFAS are typically also
present. The Moses Lake site involves groundwater but not necessarily drinking water. PWS = Public Water
System. Sources of data include the third unregulated contaminant monitoring rule (UCMR3) that sampled
mostly larger public water systems in 2013-2015 across the nation, and publicly available results from
voluntary testing by the military and public water systems collected from 2016-2021.[1]


The primary source of PFAS suspected at the above Washington sites is a type of firefighting
foam called aqueous film-forming foam, or AFFF.[1] Nationwide, other major sources of PFAS
contamination in drinking water include: discharge from fluoropolymer manufacturing plants,
industrial paper and textile manufacturing sites, chrome plating operations, land-applied
biosolids derived from industrial PFAS waste streams; and landfills that accepted industrial PFAS
waste.[2, 3]
PFAS are highly persistent in the environment.
Perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs), such as PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, PFHxS, and PFBS, have no known
natural degradation pathways and thus persist in the environment and in groundwater.[3] Other
PFAS compounds can break down partly in the environment to form persistent PFAS.[3]



                                                     8
Some PFAS are highly bioaccumulative in people.
The human body absorbs some PFAS much faster than it excretes them.[4] As a result, they
accumulate in human blood serum, liver, lung, bone, and other locations in the body.[5, 6] These
PFAS can pass from mothers to their babies in the womb.[7] They can also pass into breastmilk.[8]
PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, and PFHxS are highly bioaccumulative in humans. PFBS is more rapidly
excreted, but several studies indicate that when PFBS occurs in daily drinking water it
contributes to serum levels of PFBS in consumers.[9-11]

Most people tested have detectable levels of four PFAS in their blood serum.
In national surveys, the U.S. Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that nearly
all people tested had detectable levels of PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, and PFHxS in their blood serum. In
contrast, PFBS was detected in serum of less than 1 percent of older children and adults and
approximately 9 percent of children six to eleven years old.[12] Figure 1 shows average U.S. serum
levels of four PFAS over time. More information is available in CDC’s PFAS biomonitoring
factsheet.

                             35                                                                             PFOS
Median serum levels (µg/L)




                                                                                                            PFOA
                             30      30.2                                                                   PFHxS
                                                                                                            PFNA
                             25
                                              21.2
                             20                            17.5
                             15                                         13.6
                                                                                     9.7
                             10                                                              6.53
                                   5.2                                                                5.2       4.8
                                            4.1      4.2          4.3
                             5                                                     3.2     2.1      2.07       1.57
                             0
                                  2000      2004     2006       2008      2010             2012     2014       2016
                                                             Year of Survey
Figure 2, Time trend of median serum levels of four PFAS in representative samples of U.S. residents
>12 years old. Source: CDC National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).[13, 14]


PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, and PFNA have been largely phased out in the USA.
Over the last twenty years, major U.S. industries phased out a number of highly bioaccumulative
PFAS from production and most uses.[15] These PFAS continue to be produced in other countries
and may occur in imported materials and products.[15] Serum levels of these PFAS, especially
PFOS, declined over time in the U.S. population following phase-out (Figure 2). Other PFAS have
taken their place. For example, PFBS replaced some uses of PFOS.

PFAS in drinking water can contribute significantly to consumer exposure.
A number of studies show that PFAS in drinking water can contribute significantly to human
exposure.[9, 16-18] For example, after high levels of PFAS were discovered and removed from a
community drinking water system in Airway Heights, Washington, an ATSDR exposure study


                                                                               9
showed that residents had average blood levels of some PFAS that were much higher than
national norms.[19]

People without PFAS in their drinking water are most likely exposed through their diet, certain
consumer products, certain occupations, indoor dust, and air.[20-23]

PFAS can stay in the body long after exposure stops.
Estimates of average PFAS half-lives in human serum from different study populations are listed
below. A half-life is the time it takes for the serum concentration of a PFAS to drop by half after
exposure stops (e.g., after occupational exposure stops or drinking water contamination is
mitigated).
        PFOA:                 2.3 to 3.9 years[17]
        PFOS:                 3.3 to 4.6 years[17, 24]
        PFNA:                 2.5 to 4.3 years[25, 26]
        PFHxS:                5.3 to 7.1 years[17]
        PFBS:                 27 to 44 days[27, 28]
It can take a while for low levels of PFAS in drinking water to accumulate in serum.
PFAS risk assessors use predictive models to estimate average serum levels in a population with
PFAS in their daily drinking water. These models predict that in adults, serum levels increase
gradually over a period of years until the serum level reaches a plateau (a condition models call
steady state). Figure 3 shows an example of predicted serum level of PFOA in adults consuming
drinking water with PFOA at 10 ng/L.

                                              Serum Prediction in Adults
                                          at 10 ng/L PFOA in Drinking Water

                           5


                           4
       Serum PFOA (µg/L)




                           3


                           2
                                                                              Average consumer (1L/day)

                           1                                                  Highend consumer (2L/day)


                           0
                               0          5          10    15        20        25          30
                                                          Years




                                                                10
Figure 3. Predicted average PFOA serum levels in adults with PFOA in residential drinking water
at 10 ng/L using the Bartell model.[29] The graph starts at a serum level of 2.0 µg/L: the average
background levels of PFOA in serum in the U.S. population. It plots two scenarios of adult drinking
water intake: an average drinking water ingestion rate of one liter per day and a high-end
consumer drinking two liters per day.


Infants have higher exposure than adults to PFAS in drinking water.
Infants consume more drinking water and other fluids per pound of body weight than adults.[30]
This means that infants who drink contaminated tap water or formula mixed with that tap water
ingest more contaminant per pound of body weight than adults sharing the same drinking
water.
In addition, mothers with PFAS in their daily drinking water pass some of the PFAS they absorb
on to their babies during pregnancy and through breastfeeding.[31] PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, and
PFNA occur in breast milk at concentrations that are 1–12 percent of the mother’s serum
concentration.[4] At birth, infant serum levels of these PFAS levels are generally lower than or
similar to their mothers, but can increase sharply during periods of exclusive breastfeeding.[32-34]
The SALs support public health recommendations for breastfeeding.
We strongly recommend that nursing mothers breastfeed because of the many known health
benefits of breastfeeding. Our SALs protect the healthy practice of breastfeeding by modelling
this specific pathway of exposure and keeping estimated infant exposure at or below health
protective limits. It is important to protect infants from the types of toxicity observed with PFAS.
Thyroid hormones are critical to normal brain and body development and the immune system is
also developing during this time. Adverse effects incurred during critical stages of development
can result in health conditions that persist into adulthood.[35-37]

Health researchers are still learning about how exposure to PFAS may affect people’s
health. The strongest evidence from studies of exposed human populations indicates that some
PFAS may increase serum cholesterol levels and alter liver enzyme levels, slightly lower birth
weights, and reduce immune response to childhood vaccines.[4] More limited support is available
for increased risk of having thyroid disease, hypertension disorders during pregnancy,
reproductive problems, altered hormone levels, and metabolic issues.[4] There is limited but
growing evidence from occupational and non-occupational studies that PFOA may increase risk
of kidney and testicular cancer.[38, 39]

In laboratory animals (such as rats, mice, monkeys), some PFAS produce toxicity in the liver,
kidney, thyroid, and reproductive organs, impair the immune system, alter the growth and
development of offspring, reduce thyroid hormone levels, and alter reproductive function.
Higher rates of certain tumors have been observed in rodents administered PFOA, PFOS, or
GenX but not PFHxA over their lifetime. Other PFAS are less studied.[4]




                                                     11
The strength of the evidence and types of effects observed vary by PFAS. For details, see the
supporting information for each PFAS SAL.

We have limited ability to identify all PFAS in water or assess their health impacts.
The PFAS class contains thousands of chemicals and it is unknown how many of these could
occur in drinking water. While some research laboratories have identified hundreds of PFAS in
groundwater contaminated by PFAS containing firefighting foam,[40] commercial laboratories
testing drinking water typically test for 14-18 PFAS associated with the most commonly
produced PFAS (using EPA Method 537 1.1). A new validated method (EPA Method 533) can
detect 25 PFAS in drinking water.[41]

We still know relatively little about the potential toxicity of many PFAS. EPA has completed
assessments for PFOA, PFOS and PFBS; draft assessments of GenX and PFBA; and is currently
assessing PFDA, PFNA, PFHxS, and PFHxA.[41, 42] ATSDR developed health-based values for PFOA,
PFOS, PFNA, and PFHxS.[4] Several states have developed independent assessments.[43]

Our recommendations for five SALs focus on the most commonly detected PFAS in Washington
state drinking water with sufficient toxicity information. We recommend using these five SALs to
guide action on PFAS in drinking water while our capacity develops to more fully characterize
and assess all PFAS in water. When a water system decides to take action to reduce PFAS, we
recommend that they employ broad mitigation approaches effective for many PFAS briefly
discussed below.

Current water filtration technologies can remove many PFAS from drinking water.
EPA maintains a database of water treatment options for PFOA, PFOS, and other PFAS. The
database contains information about treatment efficacy of various technologies.[44] Current PFAS
removal technologies for water systems include granular activated carbon, reverse osmosis
membranes and anion exchange resins.[45] These can remove 90 to 99 percent of most PFAS
listed in the EPA database. Drinking water filtration requires ongoing water monitoring for
efficacy, maintenance, and periodic replacement of filter media. Active research into additional
PFAS removal and destruction technologies is underway.

Federal toxicology research underway may allow a grouped approach to regulating PFAS
mixtures.
Investigators from EPA and the National Toxicology Program (NTP) are studying 150 PFAS using
rapid high throughput testing to inform toxicity assessments.[41, 46] The list includes PFAS from 75
different subclasses of PFAS. Results from this additional research could inform a regulatory
approach based on subclasses. We will continue to monitor progress and consider adopting a
broader grouped approach to regulating PFAS mixtures as the science and methodology evolve.




                                                12
Introduction to Approach and Methods
The state action levels (SALs) were derived using the same basic approach as a Maximum
Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG) under the Safe Drinking Water Act. The MCLG equation for
non-cancer health concerns (shown below) divides a health-based value of an acceptable daily
intake called the Reference Dose (RfD) by an upper-bound drinking water ingestion rate usually
associated with the most sensitive group in the population. This term is then adjusted with the
Relative Source Contribution (RSC) to account for other sources of daily exposure from non-
drinking water sources such as food and consumer products. This yields an MCLG that is a
concentration of a contaminant in drinking water protective of human health, including sensitive
groups, assuming long-term, year-round exposure (365 days/year).



                                             𝑚𝑔
                   𝑚𝑔               𝑅𝑓𝐷 (          )
                                          𝑘𝑔 − 𝑑𝑎𝑦
             𝑀𝐶𝐿𝐺 ( ) =                                           𝑥 𝑅𝑆𝐶(%)
                    𝐿                                     𝐿
                        𝐷𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 (         )
                                                       𝑘𝑔 − 𝑑𝑎𝑦



We describe the approach that we used to identify a health-based value (such as a RfD), the
drinking water ingestion rate and the RSC in more detail below. Briefly, we calculated SALs for
PFOS, PFOA, PFNA and PFHxS, substituting internal dose for external dose in the equation
above. This is because these PFAS readily bioaccumulate in our bodies over time. Parts per
trillion concentrations of these PFAS in drinking water (external dose) result over time in parts
per billion levels in serum (internal dose). We used an exposure model developed by the
Minnesota Department of Health that accounts for age-specific intake of drinking water as well
as important indirect pathways of infant exposure to PFAS in drinking water via maternal
transfer (placental and lactational). We used the serum PFAS level to define internal dose
associated with our health protective value. For PFBS, we used EPA’s RfD and a water ingestion
rate for infants. Finally, we used an EPA decision tree to derive the RSC for each PFAS.

Selecting health-based values of acceptable daily intake for five PFAS in drinking water.
We reviewed scientific literature and the available health protective values for acceptable daily
human intake of five PFAS detected in Washington drinking water. We focused on government
risk evaluations that were high quality, peer-reviewed, comprehensive and based on current
scientific research. The health protective values we identified included U.S. EPA and U.S. state
reference doses (RfDs), ATSDR minimal risk levels (MRLs) and California Acceptable Daily Doses
(ADD). We describe the values specific to each of the five PFAS chemicals in the section
“Supporting information—How we derived each SAL” (see page 26).

Information to assess carcinogenicity of these five PFAS was available for only PFOA and PFOS.
EPA and the New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute (NJ DWQI) calculated potential cancer


                                                13
risk from PFOA based on evidence for testicular cancer in rodents and in humans. EPA and NJ
evaluators found that their reference doses based on non-cancer endpoints were also protective
against cancer risk.[47-49] California EPA Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment
derived lower cancer risk levels for PFOA and PFOS based primarily on liver cancer in rodents.
The strongest evidence for cancer risk in humans is between PFOA exposure and kidney and
testicular cancer.[38, 50] In contrast, liver cancer has not been associated with PFOA in exposed
populations.[38] For these reasons, our review focused on non-cancer outcomes. This approach
aligns with conclusions by EPA, ATSDR, and several other states that noncancer endpoints had
the best evidence base for human health protective values.

The health-based values we selected for five PFAS are based on adverse effects observed in
laboratory animals on immune function, altered development of offspring, and reduced serum
levels of thyroid hormones. Points of departure for other clearly adverse effects in the liver,
kidney, and for reproductive toxicity, were sometimes only slightly less sensitive.

All the U.S. risk assessors concluded that the limitations of epidemiological studies meant they
couldn’t be used quantitatively as the basis for an RfD. A major concern is teasing out
associations between individual PFAS (e.g. PFOA) and health outcomes in populations with
simultaneous exposure to multiple PFAS. When multiple PFAS occur in public drinking water, the
individual PFAS are often highly correlated with each other in serum samples. In addition,
epidemiological studies typically measure only about a dozen PFAS in both water and serum.
Unmeasured PFAS in drinking water may also contribute to community exposure and may
confound associations between health outcomes and measured PFAS. For example, four new
(previously unmeasured) PFAS were recently identified in the drinking water and human serum
of residents in Wilmington, NC.[51]

Another concern is that the cross-sectional study design of many PFAS epidemiological studies
limits their use in determining causality. In fact, some health outcomes associated with serum
levels of PFAS could be due to reverse causation. For example, earlier menopause and shorter
breast-feeding duration may result in increased serum PFAS since menstruation and lactation
are PFAS excretion pathways in women.[52] Conditions like kidney disease that can reduce
glomular filtration rate may lead to higher serum PFAS because it impairs a major PFAS
excretion pathway.[52, 53] Another concern is using a single serum sample to quantify PFAS
exposure. Serum levels reflect exposure across recent months to years, but will not necessarily
reflect the level in serum that preceded the onset of a disease or condition. Some studies, like
the large C8 Health Project did exhaustive exposure reconstruction to overcome this
limitation.[54] A final concern was that a number of the outcomes with the most robust evidence
in people—increased cholesterol, reduced birth weight, immunosuppression—have many
possible causes, which are difficult to control for in community-wide observational studies. Still,



                                                 14
U.S. risk assessors considered epidemiological data qualitatively when evaluating the relevance
of animal testing on human health and the weight-of-evidence for specific health outcomes.

It is important to acknowledge the uncertainty of relying on studies in laboratory animals as
well. Laboratory animals differ from humans in how rapidly they excrete a number of PFAS
(serum half-lives in hours to days in rodents vs. years in humans)[55] and in how a chemical
effects specific tissues (PPARα activation1 in rodent vs. human liver tissue). If we rely solely on
experimental animals, we can miss characterizing toxicity that is uniquely a human response.

For all five PFAS, there are large differences between humans and laboratory animals in how
external dose (the amount of intake) translates to internal dose (the amount in blood and
organs). Humans retain PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA much longer than laboratory rats, mice,
or monkeys, which leads to a higher internal dose in humans given the same external dose.[57]
For this reason, internal dose (serum level) rather than administered dose was generally used to
determine the point of departure in animal studies (such as a NOAEL, LOAEL, BMDL). When the
critical study was based on effects in offspring exposed during gestation and lactation, maternal
serum level was typically used as the most relevant measurement of internal dose. The critical
study selection was often limited to studies that measured internal dose or had sufficient data to
model serum level across the dose-range.


Relative source contribution (RSC).
When setting drinking water standards, EPA considers daily exposure expected from non-
drinking water sources and apportions a relative source contribution (RSC) for drinking water.
When significant exposures occur from other sources, such as food and consumer products,
water quality criteria must be more stringent to allow for these other exposures. The sum of all
exposure sources should not exceed the RfD or other health protective value in the most
sensitive populations.

EPA provides a decision tree for deriving the RSC for water quality standards.[58] EPA
recommends a default RSC of 0.20 (20 percent) contribution from drinking water when little
information exists about other exposure sources and pathways. EPA recommends a maximum
RSC of 0.80 to account for unknown or unexpected exposures. We used the EPA Decision Tree
to derive RSCs (Figure 4).



1
 PPARα is perioxisome proliferation activated receptor subtype alpha. This is a nuclear receptor that is
more prevalent in rodent liver than human liver and mediates certain biological responses in rodent liver
that are not thought to be relevant for human liver. 56. Corton, J.C., J.M. Peters, and J.E. Klaunig, The
PPARalpha-dependent rodent liver tumor response is not relevant to humans: addressing misconceptions.
Arch Toxicol, 2018. 92(1): p. 83-119.


                                                    15
Figure 4. EPA Exposure Decision Tree for defining apportionment of the RfD between
different regulated sources of exposure.[58]

Box 1 populations of concern. We identified the developing fetus and infant as sensitive life
stages of concern. The most sensitive endpoint for PFOA, PFNA, PFHxS, and PFBS were
developmental and thyroid hormone concerns. The critical role that thyroid hormones play


                                               16
during rapid growth and brain development makes altered thyroid hormone levels a concern for
developmental effects. For PFOS, the rodent serum level (internal dose) at the NOAEL for
developmental toxicity was only slightly higher than the point of departure for immune toxicity
(see PFOS summary for more details).
Since maternal serum drives fetal exposure and lactational exposure in infants, women of
reproductive age were considered a sensitive population.
We considered adults a sensitive population for PFOS as the RfD was based on immune
suppression in adult mice.
RSCs for infants
In Box 2, pathways of early life exposure included direct ingestion of drinking water and indirect
exposures due to placental and lactational transfer from maternal serum.
Exposure pathways other than drinking water included diet, indoor dust and air, and direct
contact with PFAS in products (cosmetics, waterproofing sprays, stain proof treatments for
carpets and textiles). We did not identify sufficient data to describe the central tendencies and
high-end exposures for individual PFAS exposure pathways (“no” to Box 3). There was, however,
infant exposure information to inform estimates of the most relevant sources of exposure (“yes”
to Box 4).
Box 6 asks about significant sources of exposure other than drinking water. Infants (birth to six
months) rely heavily on breast milk or formula for nutrition. A 2011 Norwegian Institute of Public
Health study assessed PFAS levels in indoor air, dust, and breast milk for a number of six-month-
old infants.[59] The study estimated that breast milk contributed on average 83 percent of an
infant’s total daily intake of PFOA and 94 percent of PFOS. Since we were able to model
breastmilk exposure associated with four PFAS in drinking water, we assumed few other
exposure sources for this age group (birth to six months) and answered “no” to Box 6. For infant
exposure to PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA the decision tree recommends an RSC of 50 percent
(Box 7).
For infant exposure to PFBS, we are unable to model breastmilk exposure when PFBS occurs in a
community water supply. In addition, PFBS is part of the PFAS chemistry replacing phased-out
PFAS in the current U.S. marketplace and there are significant potential PFAS sources other than
drinking water.[11, 20, 60, 61] We answered “yes” to Box 6. In Box 8A, we lacked enough information
on specific applications of PFBS-based chemistry to estimate exposure from indoor
environments, air and food pathways. We answered “no” to Box 8A and selected the 20 percent
default (Box 8B) for the PFBS RSC for all life stages.
RSCs for older children, women of childbearing age and adults
In Box 2, pathways of exposure included ingestion of drinking water, and intakes associated
with foods, indoor dust and air, and direct contact with PFAS in products (cosmetics,
waterproofing sprays, stain proof treatments for carpets and textiles). We did not identify
sufficient data to describe the central tendencies and high-end exposures for individual PFAS



                                                17
exposure pathways (“no” to Box 3). There was, however, biomonitoring information to inform
estimates of exposure to sources other than drinking water (“yes” to Box 4). Biomonitoring data
are discussed below (see Box 8). We answered yes to Box 6 as non-drinking water sources are
likely significant.
We used several lines of evidence to answer “yes” to Box 8A and estimate the total amount of
exposure from non-drinking water sources (Box 8C). CDC biomonitoring surveys provide
distributions for PFOA, PFOS, PFNA and PFHxS in the serum of the U.S. population three years
old and older.[62] Biomonitoring data provides an indication of total exposure from all sources.
We assumed that the 95th percentile of PFAS in serum of the general U.S. population adequately
represents exposure to sources other than drinking water. This assumption has limited support
from a study by Hu et al. that estimated 16.5 million people (or about 5 percent of the U.S.
population in 2014) had detectable levels of at least one of six PFAS measured in their drinking
water in a survey of mostly large public water systems in the U.S.[2] A comprehensive Michigan
state survey also provides limited support for this assumption. Michigan tested for 18 PFAS and
with lower detection limits at 1,741 drinking water sources (including public water systems, at
schools, at childcare providers, and in Tribal communities). Six percent of the total population
served by the systems tested had total PFAS levels in at least one water supply source between
10-70 ng/L. Only two water systems (<0.1 percent of population served in this survey) had more
than 70 ng/L of PFOA and PFOS combined.[63, 64] Our assumption that the 95th percentile serum
level in the general U.S. populations adequately represents non-drinking water sources is
conservative. If the true contribution from drinking water is higher, we will have overestimated
the non-drinking water sources and thus underestimated the RSC for drinking water (a lower
RSC is more protective).

Box 8C recommends the subtraction method to calculate an RSC with a ceiling of 50 percent
and a floor of 20 percent. In the equation for the subtraction method below, the target serum
level is the human serum concentration associated with PFAS intake at the RfD or MRL, and the
serum level from sources other than drinking water is the 95th percentile serum level for the age
group from NHANES.

                  𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑢𝑚 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 − 𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑢𝑚 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝑛𝑜𝑛 𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑠
          𝑅𝑆𝐶 =
                                         𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑢𝑚 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙


For the subtraction method, we used the target serum level identified for each chemical (see
chemical summaries) and the 95th percentile serum level that the 2015-16 CDC NHANES
reported for the U.S. general population ≥ twelve years of age. An NHANES survey of children
aged three to eleven years in 2013-14 provided estimates for ages three to eleven years. We
used these national estimates because we expect that serum levels of PFAS in Washington
residents will be similar. A 2004 study by Olsen et al., measured seven PFAS compounds in
stored blood serum of 238 men and women in an elderly Seattle population.[65] Levels measured



                                               18
in this population were comparable to the distribution in NHANES for the same time
period.[66]Another study of American Red Cross blood donors in six U.S. cities showed that PFOA
levels in donors living in Portland, OR were equal to or lower than donors in the other cities
tested.[67]

We then applied the ceilings and defaults recommended in the EPA Exposure Decision Tree to
derive RSCs for each age group (see Table 2, next page).




                                              19
            Table 2. Relative Source Contribution (RSC) for each PFAS by Age Group.
                            95th Percentile         Target
                             Serum Level            Serum                            RSC Using Ceilings and
 Reference                 from NHANESa             Levelb        Subtraction        Defaults from Exposure
 Population                    (ng/mL)             (ng/mL)        Method RSC             Decision Treec
 PFOA
 Ages ≥ 12 yrs.                   4.17                27.6             85%                        50%
 Females ≥ 12 yrs.d               4.17                27.6             85%                        50%
 6-11 year olds                   3.84                27.6             86%                        50%
 3-5 year olds                    5.58                27.6             80%                        50%
 Infants                            -                                  Box 7                      50%
 PFOS
 Ages ≥ 12 yrs.                   18.3                23.8             22%                        20%
 Females ≥ 12 yrs. d              15.1                23.8             36%                        35%
 6-11 year olds                   12.4                23.8             47%                        45%
 3-5 year olds                    8.82                23.8             63%                        50%
 Infants                            -                                  Box 7                      50%
 PFHxS
 Ages ≥ 12 years                  4.9                 108              95%                        50%
 Females >12 yrs. d               3.8                 108              97%                        50%
 6-11 year olds                   4.4                 108              96%                        50%
 3-5 year olds                    1.62                108              99%                        50%
 Infants                            -                                  Box 7                      50%
 PFNA
 Ages ≥ 12 yrs.                   1.90                22.7             92%                        50%
 Females ≥ 12 yrs. d              1.80                22.7             92%                        50%
 6-11 year olds                   3.19                22.7             86%                        50%
 3-5 year olds                    3.49                22.7             85%                        50%
 Infants                            -                                  Box 7                      50%
 PFBS
 Ages ≥ 12 yrs.                   < 0.1                               Box 8B                      20%
 Females ≥ 12 yrs. d              < 0.1                               Box 8B                      20%
 6-11 year olds                   0.13                                Box 8B                      20%
 3-5 year olds                    < 0.1                               Box 8B                      20%
 Infants                            -                                 Box 8B                      20%
aNHANES data on PFAS serum levels in 3-11 year olds are from a 2013-14 nationally representative sample. For ages 12

and up, serum levels of PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS and PFNA are from the 2015-16 NHANES survey and serum PFBS is from
the 2013-14 NHANES survey [68]. < 0.1 means less than the limit of detection of 0.1 ug/L.
bTarget serum levels are the concentration of the PFAS in serum associated with an oral intake rate at the RfD or MRL.

More information about the target serums are in the supporting information for each SAL.
cThe RSCs in the right hand column were derived using the subtraction method and the EPA Exposure Decision Tree [58].

d
  Serum levels of female ≥12 years old were used to represent women of childbearing age.




                                                         20
Drinking water ingestion rate.
EPA calculates a health protective level in drinking water by dividing the RfD with a drinking
water ingestion rate that is protective of the population, including sensitive groups. For chronic
criteria meant to cover a lifetime of exposure, EPA typically uses the 90th percentile of adult
drinking water ingestion rates from the EPA Exposure Factors Handbook. If a sensitive
subpopulation is identified, drinking water ingestion rates are selected specific to their expected
consumption.
Infants are considered a sensitive population for PFAS, so we applied their drinking water
ingestion rates. In addition, breastfeeding infants will have a secondary pathway of exposure if
their mothers are consuming PFAS in their daily tap water. PFAS ingested by the mother will
contribute to PFAS in her breastmilk. Several studies have observed rapid accumulation of PFOA
and other bioaccumulative PFAS in the serum of breastfed infants during the first year of life.[32,
69-71]
       Additionally, higher serum levels in older children (eight years old) correlate with breast
feeding history.[33, 72]
In order to account for higher drinking water intake rates of children and the breastfeeding
pathway, the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) developed a toxicokinetic model for age-
specific intake of PFOA in drinking water that includes infant exposures via breastfeeding. The
method was peer reviewed by academic, government, and private industry experts and
published in a peer-reviewed journal.[33]
MDH employed the model instead of a standard drinking water ingestion rate in their Health-
Based Guidance Values for PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS in drinking water.[73-75] Michigan Department
of Health and Human Services (MDHHS)[76] and the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NHDES)[77] recently adapted the model for PFNA and employed the
model to derive their state recommendations on PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA.
Brief summary of the MDH transgenerational toxicokinetic model.[33]
    Assumes that exposure to PFAS contamination in a community water supply is chronic,
     that maternal exposure begins at birth, and that her serum level at the time of pregnancy
     reflects her accumulated lifetime consumption.
    Calculates serum concentrations from the dose and clearance rate for each PFAS using
     the equation below. Where dose = water or breastmilk intake (L/kg-day) x water or
     breastmilk PFAS concentration (mg/L) and clearance rate= volume of distribution (L/kg) x
     (Ln 2/human half-life of PFAS, in days).
                                                           𝑚𝑔
                                        𝑚𝑔        𝐷𝑜𝑠𝑒 (         )
                                                        𝑘𝑔 − 𝑑𝑎𝑦
                   𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑢𝑚 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ( ) =
                                         𝐿                       𝐿
                                             𝐶𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 (          )
                                                              𝑘𝑔 − 𝑑𝑎𝑦
    Predicts infant serum at birth as a proportion of maternal serum concentration. The ratio
     applied is a mean or median placental transfer ratio from empirical studies of PFAS in
     paired maternal and cord serum.


                                                21
    Includes two scenarios of infant nutrition. The first scenario assumes exclusive
     breastfeeding through twelve months and the second scenario assumes formula feeding
     with infant formula prepared with tap water. In both scenarios, MDH applied age-specific
     drinking water ingestion rates throughout childhood to predict serum levels into
     adulthood for a given concentration of a PFAS in drinking water.
    Models lactational transfer to infants with mean or median breastmilk transfer ratios
     from empirical observations of PFAS in paired breast milk and maternal serum levels.
    Assumes upper bound ingestion rate (mean plus two standard deviations) for breast milk
     intake by infants and 95th percentile drinking water ingestion by all age groups.
    Models a gradual decline in breast milk concentration of PFAS over the course of
     lactation.
    Applies age-adjusted factors to the chemical-specific volume of distribution, to account
     for differences in the extracellular water content in children as a percentage of their body
     weight. The age adjustment factors range from 2.4 for newborns to 1.0 for children over
     one year old.
    Addresses non-drinking water sources of exposure to PFAS within the relative source
     contribution parameter. Specifically, serum levels of infants and children must remain
     below the proportion of the RfD allotted to drinking water sources.
We modified several parameters in the MDH model based on the following evidence.
    Duration of exclusive breastfeeding: The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
     recommends that infants be exclusively breastfed for the first six months with continued
     breastfeeding alongside introduction of appropriate complementary foods for one year
     or longer. This includes complementary foods and beverages mixed with tap water. The
     department actively supports these recommendations and conducts outreach and
     support activities every year to help families follow them. According to the CDC Breast-
     feeding Report Card for Washington State Infants Born In 2017, 58 percent of
     Washington mothers reported exclusive breast-feeding through three months and 29
     percent reported exclusive breast-feeding through six months. Seventy-one percent of
     Washington infants are not exclusively breastfed through six months.
       These data and the AAP recommendation support a model assumption of gradually
       phasing out breast milk after six months while phasing in other dietary sources of
       nutrition and drinking water. We assumed exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months
       followed by a six-month period when breastmilk intake declines as other sources of
       nutrition increase. During the breastmilk phase-out, tap water intake increases so the
       combined liquid intake from both sources remains at the 95th percentile intake for this
       age group (133 mL/kg-day).
    Estimate of high-end drinking water ingestion rate. In the 2019 EPA exposure factors
     handbook, drinking water ingestion rates come from surveys of a representative
     population asked about their water consumption in the last two days.[30] Survey results



                                              22
       are a measure of high-end consumption by individuals on any given day in a population
       but do not represent consumption over long periods by an individual who represents the
       95th percentile for chronic intake. EPA prefers the 90th percentile to represent upper-end
       consumption over long periods of time.
       We applied age-specific 90th percentile water-ingestion rates for chronic intake of water
       after one year of age. This included women of childbearing age in the years prior to
       pregnancy. We retained the MDH model assumption of 95th percentile water ingestion
       by mothers during twelve-months of lactation, 95th percentile ingestion of water for
       formula-fed infants, and upper bound intake estimates for breastmilk intake (mean plus
       two standard deviations) by breastfed infants.
Table 3, below, shows our model inputs for the MDH model. We retained MDH’s other
assumptions on half-life, volume of distribution, and lactational transfer ratios. MDH did not
derive drinking water advice for PFNA. For PFNA we used the model inputs developed by the
Michigan Department of Health and Human Services,[76] with the exception of a more recent
half-life estimate from Yu et al., 2021.[26]
We did not use the MDH model for PFBS because we had insufficient information to model
infant lactational exposures. For PFBS, we used the 95th percentile estimate for drinking water
intake for infants from birth to one year old (from the 2019 EPA Exposure Factors Handbook
Table 3-3) as this life stage is the most exposed sensitive population.




                                               23
       Table 3. Washington Department of Health model parameters for the MDH
          transgenerational exposure model of PFAS in infancy and childhood.
                                Central or Upper
                                  Tendency of
 Model Parameter                   Parameter        PFOAa    PFOSa     PFHxSa PFNAb
 Half-life (years)                                  Central              2.3         3.4         5.3         3.5c
 Placental Transfer Ratio                           Central             0.87        0.40        0.70        0.69
 Breastmilk Transfer Ratio                          Central             0.052       0.017       0.014       0.032
 Volume of Distribution (L/kg)                      Central             0.17        0.230       0.25        0.20
 Relative Source Contribution (%)                   Upper                50          50          50          50
                                                                    All PFAS scenarios
 Duration of exclusive breast feeding
                                          Mid-upper                       6
 (months)
 Duration of breastmilk phase out
 with addition of solid foods and
                                          Mid-upper                       6
 liquids based on drinking water
 (months)
 Age-specific water ingestion rates (ml/kg-day)d
 Birth to <1 month                       Upper (95th)                    224
 1 to <3 months                          Upper (95th)                    267
 3 to <6 months                          Upper (95th)                    158
 6 to <12 months                         Upper (95th)                    133
 Birth to <1 year                        Upper (95th)                    174
 1 to <2 years                           Upper (90th)                     49
 2 to <3 years                           Upper (90th)                     51
 3 to <6 years                           Upper (90th)                     39
 6 to <11 years                          Upper (90th)                     31
 11 to <16 years                         Upper (90th)                     25
 16 to <21 years                         Upper (90th)                     25
 Adults 21 <50 years                     Upper (90th)                     35
 Lactating women   e
                                         Upper (95th)                     47
 Women of childbearing age    e
                                         Upper (90th)                     35
 Breastmilk ingestion ratesf (mL/kg-day)
 Birth to <1 month                          Upper                        220
 1 to <3 months                             Upper                        190
 3 to <6 months                             Upper                        150
 6 to <12 months                          Phase-out                    150->0
a Model inputs that MDH developed based on review of empirical epidemiological studies.
b Model inputs developed by the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services.

c Mean serum half-life observed over three annual serum measurements in 68 highly exposed participants after PFNA

was removed from community drinking water system (Yu et al. 2021).
d 2019 update to Chapter 3 EPA Exposure Factors Handbook, Table 3-1 Recommended values for drinking water

ingestion rates (2 day average community intake) and Table 3-21 Two-day average, consumer-only estimates of
combined direct and indirect water ingestion based on National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
2005−2010: community water (mL/kg-day).
e 2019 update to Chapter 3 EPA Exposure factors Handbook. Table 3-3 recommended values for water ingestion rates of

community water of pregnant and lactating women and women of childbearing age (13 to <50 years) and Table 3-63




                                                         24
Two-day average consumer-only drinking water intake: pregnant and lactating women, and women of child-bearing
age (13 to <50 years).
f 2011 EPA Exposure factors Handbook, Table 15-1. Upper percentile is reported as the mean plus 2 standard deviations.




We used the process described above for determining health protective values, drinking water
intake, and the relative source contribution, to derive SALs for five PFAS shown in Table 4. We
used the MDH model to ensure that serum levels in infants and children remained below the
serum equivalent of the dose allotted to drinking water sources. We provide details on how we
derived each SAL in the Supporting Information for each PFAS.

          Table 4. Recommended health protective values and state action levels (SALs)
                         for five PFAS in Washington drinking water
              RfD/MRL                                                   Relative                                  SAL in
               (ng/kg-       Source                                     Source              Ingestion            drinking
 PFAS            day)        (year)         Basis                       Contribution        rate                  water
                             ATSDR
                                            Developmental
 PFOA              3         MRL                                        50%                 MDH modela            10 ng/L
                                            effects in mice.
                             (2021)
                             MDH,           Immune effects in
                             NHDESb         mice. Also protective       20% Adults
 PFOS              3                                                                        MDH modela            15 ng/L
                             RfD            of developmental            50% Children
                             (2019)         effects in rats.
                             Modified
                                                                                            MDH model
                             ATSDR          Developmental
 PFNA            2.5   c
                                                                        50%                 w/MDHHS                9 ng/L
                             MRLc           effects in mice.
                                                                                            inputsd
                             (2021)
                                            Reduced thyroid
                             MDH RfD        hormone (T4) in rats
 PFHxS            9.7                                                   50%                 MDH modela            65 ng/L
                             (2019)         (developmental
                                            concern).e
                                            Reduced thyroid
                             EPA RfD        hormone (T4) in mice
 PFBS            300                                                    20%                 0.174 L/kg-d         345 ng/L
                             (2021)         (developmental
                                            concern).e
aThe MDH model is the Minnesota Department of Health toxicokinetic model for infant intake of bioaccumulative PFAS

in drinking water. It includes age-specific drinking water ingestion rates as well as placental and lactational transfer
pathways from mother to child.
bNHDES is the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.

cWe modified the ATSDR MRL by substituting a serum half-life estimate of 3.5 years from Yu et al. 2021.

dMDHHS is the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. We used MDHHS inputs but substituted serum

half-life estimate of 3.5 years from Yu et al. 2021.
eT4 is thyroxine, a thyroid hormone.




                                                             25
Supporting Information―How We
        Derived Each SAL




              26
Deriving the State Action Level for PFOA
Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) has seven fully
fluorinated carbons and a carboxylic acid group at
one end. In drinking water, PFOA occurs in the form
of its anion shown here. PFOA was used as a
processing aid to make products that repel water and
oil, resist heat, and have extreme durability. These
include a wide array of household and industrial
products such as non-stick cookware, stain-resistant
carpets, waterproof fabrics, and clothing. Chemicals                          Perfluorooctanoate
that can breakdown to PFOA (called PFOA precursors)
were used in coated paper and cardboard, food packaging such as fast food wrappers and
parchment papers, and in certain types of firefighting foam.[4, 15, 78] Under a stewardship
agreement with the U.S. EPA, major domestic manufacturers of PFOA voluntarily phased-out
their production between 2006 and 2015. In 2020, EPA restricted significant new uses of PFOA
and import of certain products containing PFOA unless EPA reviews and approves them.[79] PFOA
and precursor chemicals may still be produced and released globally. PFOA has no known
natural degradation pathway. Its persistence and water solubility enable it to leach into
groundwater from surface soils.

In national surveys, nearly every person tested had detectable levels of PFOA in their blood
serum. The average serum level in the U.S. has declined by 60 percent since the phase-out of
PFOA and precursors in the U.S. began in 2006.[68] The CDC NHANES survey from 2015-16
reported 1.56 µg/L as the mean serum level of PFOA in the U.S. general population (aged twelve
and older) and 4.17 µg/L as the 95th percentile of the population distribution.[62] PFOA
accumulates in our bodies because it is readily absorbed orally and only slowly excreted.
Estimates of median or average serum half-life of PFOA in human studies ranged from 2.3 to 3.9
years with very little difference reported between sexes.[17] The long half-life of PFOA in humans
is attributed to resorption of PFOA following filtration by the kidney.[80] In humans, PFOA
appears to accumulate most in liver, kidney, blood serum, lung, and bone.[5, 81]

Food and drinking water contamination are thought to be the major pathways of
nonoccupational exposure to PFOA.[4] People may also be directly exposed to PFOA or
precursors chemicals when handling certain products and indirectly exposed when indoor dust
and air becomes contaminated by products that release PFOA.[4] Exposure to PFOA may also be
higher in young children because of age-specific behaviors (e.g., mouthing of treated textiles,
closer contact with treated carpets, higher incidental ingestion of house dust, higher
consumption of food and water per pound body weight).




                                                 27
The primary effects observed in laboratory animals following PFOA exposure are liver toxicity,[82-
85]
    immunotoxicity,[86-88] reproductive and developmental toxicity,[84, 89-93] and altered thyroid
hormones.[94] Numerous health effects are associated with PFOA exposure in humans.
Epidemiological studies have assessed health outcomes in PFOA-exposed workers from
manufacturing plants, large communities with high levels of PFOA in drinking water, and the
general population with background exposures from diet and consumer products.[4] The adverse
health effects in humans with the strongest and most consistent associations with higher PFOA
exposure are elevated serum cholesterol,[95, 96] reduced birth weight,[97, 98] reduced antibody
response to vaccines,[99, 100] and increased serum liver enzymes.[101-105] Studies also report
associations between PFOA exposure and altered development of reproductive tissue and
delayed puberty,[106, 107] higher serum uric acid,[108-110] altered thyroid hormone levels and thyroid
disorders,[111-114] pregnancy-induced hypertension and preeclampsia,[115-117] and ulcerative
colitis.[118, 119]
PFOA is not considered genotoxic or mutagenic but studies in laboratory animals show
increased incidence of tumors in liver, testicular, and pancreatic tissues as well as ovarian tubular
hyperplasia.[120-123] PFOA exposure was positively associated with increased incidence of kidney
and testicular cancers in a large study of people with high levels of a PFOA exposure from their
drinking water (the C8 Health Project).[124-126] A study in the U.S. general population also
reported a higher risk of renal cell carcinoma associated with higher serum PFOA levels.[39] The
prospective design of this second study allowed the authors to control for reverse causation due
to diminished kidney function. Most other studies in the general population have looked for but
not found associations between serum PFOA levels and a range of human cancers.[127-130] In
2016, EPA classified PFOA as having “suggestive evidence” of carcinogenic potential in
humans.[81] The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has classified PFOA as
possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B)[38]

Review of Health Protective Values
DOH reviewed the available health protective values for daily chronic human intake of PFOA. We
focused on high-quality and comprehensive risk evaluations that considered current scientific
research and were conducted by U.S. federal and state agencies. We focused on noncancer
endpoints as discussed on page 13. Health protective values identified included an EPA
reference dose (RfD), an ATSDR minimal risk level (MRL), an acceptable daily dose (ADD)
developed by CA OEHHA, and target serum levels developed by NJ DWQI and NHDES. A target
serum is equivalent to an RfD except on a serum basis.
These health protective values are shown in Table 5 below. EPA and ATSDR selected
developmental endpoints as the basis for their health-based values for PFOA while NJ, NH, and
CA based their health-based values on liver effects.




                                                 28
                              Table 5. Health Protective Values for PFOA Reviewed by WA
                                                                                                              Oral RfD,
                                                                           Human                              MRL, ADDb,
             Critical                                                      Equivalent      Uncertainty        or Target          Exposure
 Source      Study              Critical Effect                            Dose            Factors (UF)a      Serum Level        Duration
                                LOAEL (1 mg/kg-day) for
                                                                           0.0053
                                developmental effects of                                   UFtotal 300
                                                                           mg/kg-day
                                gestational exposure in mice
 EPA         Lau et al.                                                                                       20 ng/kg-day
                                (reduced bone ossification, earlier                        UFH =10                               Chronic
 2016[120]   2006                                                          (38 mg/L x                         (RfD)
                                puberty in males).                                         UFA = 3
                                                                           0.000139
                                Estimated maternal serum level at                          UFL =10
                                                                           L/kg-day)
                                LOAEL: 38 mg/L.
                                BMDL10 for 10% increase in                                                    14.5 µg/L
                                relative liver weight in male adult                        UFtotal 300        (target serum
 NJ
                                mice following a 14-day exposure.                                             level)c
 DWQI        Loveless et
                                                                                           UFH =10                               Chronic
 2017        al. 2006
 [78, 96]                       LOAEL: 0.3 mg/kg-day                                       UFA = 3
                                Estimated serum at                                         UFD =10            2 ng/kg-dayd
                                BMDL10: 4.35 mg/L                                                             (RfD)
                                LOAEL (0.3 mg/kg-day) for                  0.000821        UFtotal 300
 ATSDR                          skeletal effects in mouse offspring        mg/kg-day
                                                                                                                                 Inter-
 2021        Koskela et al.     in adulthood following                                     UFH =10            3 ng/kg-day
                                                                                                                                 mediate
 [4]
             2016;              gestational exposure                       (8.29 mg/L      UFA = 3            (MRL)
                                                                                                                                 (2-52 wks.)
                                Predicted time-weighted average            x 0.000099      UFL =10
                                maternal serum level: 8.29 mg/L.           L/kg-day)
                                                                                                              43.5 µg/L
                                BMDL10 for 10% increase in                                 UFtotal 100        (target serum
                                relative liver weight in male adult                                           level)c
 NHDES
             Loveless et        mice following a 14-day exposure.                          UFH =10
 2019                                                                                                                            Chronic
 [77, 131]   al. 2006                                                                      UFA = 3            Or
                                LOAEL: 0.3 mg/kg-day. Estimated                            UFD = 3
                                                                                                              6.1 ng/kg-
                                serum at the BMDL10: 4.35 mg/L
                                                                                                              daye (RfD)
                                LOAEL (0.05 mg/kg-day) for                                                    3.2 µg/L
                                                                                           UFtotal 300
                                physiological changes in liver that                                           (target serum
                                could lead to adverse effects                                                 level)g
 CA                                                                                        UFH =10
                                observed in female adult mice in
 OEHHA       Li et al. 2017                                                                UFA = 3                               Chronic
                                a 28-day gavage study.                                                        Or
 2019[132]                                                                                 UFL = 3f
                                                                                           UFD = 3f
                                Measured mean serum level at                                                  0.45 ng/kg-
                                LOAEL: 0.97 mg/L.                                                             day (ADD)
aUncertainty factors: UF
                        H=intra-species uncertainty factor (human variability); UFA= inter-species uncertainty factor; UFS= subchronic to
chronic uncertainty factor; UFL= LOAEL to NOAEL uncertainty factor; UFD= incomplete database uncertainty factor; UFtotal= total (multiplied)
uncertainty factor. Uncertainty factors are generally applied as factors of 1 (no adjustment), 3 or 10, with 3 and 10 representing a 0.5 and 1.0
log-unit. Because individual UFs represent log-units, the product of two UFs of 3 is taken to be 10.
bRfD= Reference dose. MRL = minimal risk level. Target serum level is the concentration of the PFAS in serum associated with an oral intake

rate at the RfD or MRL. ADD = acceptable daily dose.
cNJ DWQI and NHDES expressed their health-based value as a target serum level rather than a daily dose.




                                                                    29
dFor purposes of comparison, NJ calculated an RfD for their target serum level by multiplying their target serum by the EPA-derived

clearance factor for PFOA. 0.0145 mg/L x 0.000139 L/kg-day = 0.000002 mg/kg-day.
eNHDES used a dosimetric adjustment factor of 0.000149 L/kg-day to calculate an RfD from the target serum level. 0.0435 mg/L x 0.000149

= 0.000006 mg/kg-day.
f
  CA OEHHA applied a UFl of 3 instead of 10 for use of a LOAEL because the critical effects are upstream physiological changes that can lead
to adverse effects. The UFD reflects their concern about development toxicity (reduced female pup weights) reported by van Esterik et al. 2016
at dietary doses of 0.01 mg/kg-day in pregnant mice (serum levels were not measured).
gCA OEHHA calculated a target human serum of 3.2 µg/L (=0.97 mg/L ÷300 UF). The target serum was then multiplied by EPA’s daily

clearance factor for PFOA (0.00014 L/kg-day) to express the ADD as a daily dose.



        EPA RfD
        EPA based its RfD on Lau et al. 2006,[89] which was a developmental study in mice that
        administered oral doses of 1, 3, 5, 10, 20, and 40 mg/kg-day PFOA on gestation days (GD) 1-17.
        Severe reproductive toxicity (increased incidence of full litter absorptions) was observed
        ≥5 mg/kg-day dose (external dose). Most neonates in the dose groups ≥10 mg/kg-day PFOA
        died shortly after birth. Dams showed less weight gain at the end of pregnancy and higher
        maternal liver weight at all PFOA dose groups. Teratological examination of “at term” fetuses
        showed reduced ossification of bones at several sites at 1 mg/kg-day with progression to limb
        and tail defects ≥ 5 mg/kg-day. In live pups, the study observed retarded growth ≥3 mg/kg-day
        and delayed development of eye opening ≥5 mg/kg-day. Female pups showed slightly altered
        timing of pubertal maturation compared to controls. Surviving male pups reached puberty early
        at all doses including almost four days early at 1 mg/kg-day despite a body weight deficit of 25–
        30 percent compared to controls. The LOAEL for reduced ossification and early puberty in males
        was 1 mg/kg-day. There was no NOAEL for developmental effects or for liver weight increase in
        dams.[89]

        EPA’s point of departure was the LOAEL of 1.0 mg/kg-day. EPA evaluators concluded that
        alterations in bone development and in timing of puberty observed were unlikely to be
        secondary to reduced growth. EPA used a toxicokinetic model developed by Wambaugh et al.
        2013, to estimate an average maternal rodent serum level of 38 mg/L (internal dose) associated
        with the LOAEL (external dose). EPA calculated a daily intake in humans that would produce this
        same average serum level in a human population assuming years of exposure. Assumptions
        included a human serum half-life for PFOA of 2.3 years and a volume of distribution for adults of
        0.17 L/kg. The human equivalent dose was 0.0053 mg/kg-day. EPA applied an uncertainty factor
        of 300 to derive a chronic oral RfD of 20 ng/kg-day.[120]

        EPA also calculated candidate RfDs for several other critical effects observed in animal studies
        including signs of liver necrosis in rats from Perkins et al. 2004, kidney weight changes in adult
        rats in a two-generation reproductive study by Butenhoff et al. 2004, and reduced immune
        response to an antigen challenge in mice by De Witt et al. 2008.[82, 86, 133] The candidate RfD
        based on developmental effects from Lau et al. 2006 was as low or lower than the other RfDs.




                                                                   30
ATSDR MRL
ATSDR selected a different developmental study as the basis of their minimal risk level (MRL):
Koskela et al. 2016. This study published in two papers,[134, 135] dosed pregnant mice daily from
gestation days 1–21 with 0.3 mg/kg-day via their food. Offspring were not administered PFOA
doses, but they were allowed to nurse until postnatal day 21. ATSDR estimated a time-weighted
average maternal serum level to be 8.29 mg/L (internal dose). Offspring were tested for
neurobehavioral and skeletal effects into their adulthood. Subtle measures of physical activity
level were increased in PFOA-exposed pups at five to eight weeks of age. Measures of strength,
coordination, and response to novelty or response to an adverse task did not differ between
controls and treated offspring. Two groups of five offspring were sacrificed at 13 months and 17
months of age and their bones analyzed for skeletal effects. Concentration of PFOA in femurs
and tibias of treated animals was four to five times higher than in controls. Subtle changes in
bone morphology and mineral density were observed. Skeletal changes in this study extend the
observations of Lau et al. 2006 and add additional weight to skeletal effects as a sensitive
developmental effect for PFOA in rodents. A 2019 study by NTP provides further support. In this
study, adult male rats dosed with 10 mg/kg-day PFOA (plasma concentration was 148.6 mg/L)
had signs of bone marrow hypocellularity of mild severity after 28 days of oral exposure.[94]

ATSDR selected the LOAEL (0.3 mg/kg-day; serum level of 8.29 mg/L) as the point of departure
for decreased bone mineral density and used a model employed by EPA (with modifications) to
calculate a daily intake in humans predicted to produce the same serum level in humans
assuming years of exposure. Modified inputs to the model included a volume of distribution for
PFOA of 0.2 L/kg and a half-life of 3.8 years in human serum based on observations in an
occupational cohort by Olsen et al. 2007.[101] The Olsen study had a longer follow-up time than
the Bartell et al. 2010 study[136] used by EPA. ATSDR reasoned that a study with longer follow-up
is more likely to represent the initial and terminal rates of serum elimination of PFOA in humans.
On the other hand, Olsen et al. was a small (n=24) and mostly male population of retired
fluorochemical workers whereas Bartell et al. studied a larger population (n=200) of men and
women whose main exposure to PFOA was via drinking water.[136] The resulting human
equivalent dose was 0.00082 mg/kg-day, which was divided by an uncertainty factor of 300 to
derive an MRL of 2.7 rounded to 3 ng/kg-day.
NJ DWQI and NHDES Target Serums
Both NJ and NH based their health-based value on increased relative liver weight observed in
Loveless et al. 2006. This was a fourteen-day oral dosing study in adult male mice and rats that
tested for toxicity of different mixtures of linear and branched isomers of the ammonium salt of
PFOA, ammonium perfluorooctanoate (APFO). There was a 17–20 percent increase in liver
weight relative to body weight in male mice at the lowest dose tested (0.3 mg/kg-day). Mean
serum levels of PFOA at this dose were 10–14 mg/L depending on the composition of branched
vs. linear PFOA in the test mixture. This was accompanied by a significant increase in
peroxisomal β-oxidation activity indicating that PPARα activation played a role in the liver


                                                31
effects observed at the LOEL.[137] Male rats were not as sensitive as mice (LOEL for increased
relative liver weight in male rats was 1 mg/kg-day; serum level 48–65 mg/L). Declines in serum
lipids were a more sensitive outcome than liver weight in the rat.[137]
These results were supported by similar liver observations in a four-week immune toxicity study
in adult male rats and mice by Loveless et al. 2008 conducted with linear chain AFPO. Daily
doses of 0, 0.3, 1, 10, or 30 mg/kg-day PFOA were administered by oral gavage. Serum
cholesterol and triglycerides were reduced at 0.3 mg/kg-day in rats and 10 mg/kg-day in mice,
liver weight was increased at 1 mg/kg-day in both rats and mice. Signs of liver injury (focal
necrosis) were observed at higher doses in rats and mice. Serum PFOA was not measured in this
experiment. The LOAEL for immunotoxicity outcomes (suppressed antibody response to sheep
red blood cell antigen and atrophy in thymus and spleen) was 10 mg/kg-day in mice. The rat
was not sensitive to PFOA immunotoxicity consistent with several other longer duration studies
in rats.[83]
New Jersey DWQI used benchmark dose methodology to estimate the serum level associated
with a BMDL for 10 percent increase in relative liver weight in mice.[96] A mouse serum level of
4.35 mg/L was their point of departure. They divided this by an uncertainty factor of 300 to
derive a target serum level of 14.5 µg/L for humans. Although NJ developed a target serum level
rather than a daily dose as the basis for their drinking water MCL, they calculated an RfD of
2 ng/kg-day for comparison purposes using the same model as EPA to estimate an average
daily human intake that would result in the target serum level.
NHDES used the same critical study and BMDL analysis as NJ DWQI but applied a smaller
uncertainty factor for other toxicities in calculating a human equivalent serum. NH’s resulting
target serum level was 43.5 µg/L and its RfD was 6.1 ng/ kg-day.
CA OEHHA ADD
CA OEHHA based their acceptable daily dose on adverse effects in liver cells in Li et al., 2017. In
this study, male and female mice were dosed daily with PFOA by oral gavage for 28 days.[138]
Dose groups were 0, 0.05, 0.5, or 2.5 mg/kg-day. At the end of the experiment, PFOA was
measured in serum and the livers were evaluated for histopathology and levels of protein
expression. Significant increases in liver weight were observed in all treatment groups except in
low dose males. Histopathology in both sexes showed hepatocellular hypertrophy at doses of
0.5 and 2.5 mg/kg-day and apoptosis (programmed cell death) in hepatocytes at 2.5 mg/kg-day.
The study investigated the underlying mechanisms and concluded that apoptosis was triggered
by hyperaccumulation of reactive oxygen species in liver cells.[138] While PPARα activation
appeared to explain much of the reactive oxygen species generation, PPARα activation was not
evident in the low dose females. The mechanism in the low dose females appeared to be
leakage of reactive oxygen species from Complex 1 of the electron transport chain in the
mitochondria.
CA OEHHA’s critical liver effect was loss in mitochondrial membrane potential and increased
biomarkers of apoptosis and of oxidative DNA damage in hepatocytes in the low dose female


                                                32
mice. An increase in relative liver weight was also observed in this group. CA evaluators
acknowledged that the critical effects selected are upstream physiological changes in liver cells
that can lead to adverse effects. CA OEHHA’s point of departure was a LOAEL of 0.97 mg/L PFOA
serum level in low dose female mice (0.05 mg/kg-day dose group).[132] Their uncertainty factor of
300 included a three-fold factor for database uncertainty based on concern about
developmental toxicity observed at a lower oral dose (LOAEL 0.01 mg/kg-day, NOAEL 0.003
mg/kg-day) in a developmental mouse study by van Esterik et al. 2016.[139] That study
administered PFOA in maternal feed and did not measure serum levels of PFOA so the internal
dose of dams and offspring could not be confirmed. CA OEHHA calculated a target human
serum of 3.2 µg/L (0.97 mg/L ÷ 300 UF) and multiplied this by EPA’s daily clearance factor for
PFOA (0.00014 L/kg-day) to express the ADD as a daily dose (0.45 ng/kg-day). See Table 5.
Discussion of uncertainties
In rodents, especially mice, liver is a sensitive target of PFOA toxicity.[81] PPARα activation has
been shown to play a major role in mediating these effects in mouse liver, although PPARα
activation is not the exclusive mechanism responsible.[140-142] The human liver is less responsive
to PPARα agonists and this introduces uncertainty in extrapolating to humans from dose-
response relationships in mice.[56, 143] EPA and ATSDR followed the Hall criteria established by an
expert group of scientists to determine adversity of liver effects.[144] Both EPA and ATSDR
evaluators concluded that the liver weight changes observed at low doses in mice did not meet
criteria for being an adverse effect. Liver weight increase was considered adverse only when
accompanied by histological findings of cellular necrosis, inflammation, fibrosis, or steatosis in
liver tissue. Specifically, EPA considered clearly adverse liver effects (low-level necrotic cell
damage) observed in rats and mice in three studies.[82, 83, 133] The liver effects considered adverse
by EPA and ATSDR had higher LOAELs than developmental effects used as the basis of the EPA
RfD and the ATSDR MRL.[4, 81] As more information emerges about the mechanisms of action and
their applicability to humans, we may reevaluate this endpoint as a point of departure.

Another area of uncertainty for PFOA is the functional significance and relevance to humans of
delayed and reduced mammary gland development observed in certain strains of mice.[91-93, 145-
148]
     NJ DWQI added a ten-fold database uncertainty factor for this finding. ATSDR and EPA
concluded that this endpoint needed further investigation before it could be interpreted for risk
assessment. EPA noted variability in the dose-response between strains of mice and in the
scoring of mammary gland development across studies. They also noted that the developmental
delay observed at low doses did not have an adverse effect on lactational support of offspring in
a two-generation mouse study by White et al. 2011.[93] In their assessment of this endpoint, EPA
derived a human equivalent dose (HED) of 0.0017 mg/kg-day based on mammary gland effects
in Macon et al. 2011.[92] This HED is not as low as the ATSDR HED (0.000821 mg/kg-day) based
on other developmental effects (see Table 5). This endpoint may need to be reconsidered as
more data emerges.



                                                   33
Human Relevance
In human observational studies, modest increases in serum liver enzyme levels and other
markers suggestive of liver damage have been associated with higher serum levels of PFOA in
adults. [103, 104, 149-151] In studies of children, higher prenatal and mid-childhood PFOA
concentrations were associated with slight decreases in the liver enzyme ALT indicating
potentially better liver function in a Boston birth cohort of children aged eight years old (serum
PFOA ranged from 0.1-14.3 ng/L).[152] A cross-sectional study in Atlanta children (aged seven to
nineteen years old) with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease found positive associations between the
level of serum PFOS and PFHxS, but not PFOA, and increased severity observed in liver histology
(liver steatosis, inflammation, fibrosis).[153] PFOA exposure was not associated with an increase of
clinically diagnosed liver disease in adults in the large C8 study.[149]

Development effects with some supporting epidemiological evidence are described below. A
number of studies have reported small but consistently inverse relationships between maternal
PFOA level and birth weight.[97, 98, 154, 155] A downward shift in birthweights across an exposed
population might result in more children classified as low birth weight or small for gestational
age. These are clinically important risk factors for metabolic and cardiovascular diseases later in
life.[156] Confounding by maternal glomerular filtration rate (GRF) appears to explain some of the
association with birth weight observed in studies that measured prenatal PFOA exposure in
maternal serum later in pregnancy or in cord blood.[97, 157-159] However, two recent high quality
studies reported significant inverse associations with birth weight when maternal PFOA level was
measured early in pregnancy.[98, 155] In addition, Zhu and Bartell (2020) reported that lower
average birth weights in county level data correlated with higher concentrations of PFAS
(including PFOA) reported in public water systems.[160] This association would not be
confounded by maternal GFR. Wikstrom et al., 2020, reported a positive association between
higher maternal serum PFOA and having a baby that was small for gestational age in girls
only.[155] Savitz et al. 2012 did not see an association between prior PFOA exposure and term
births that met the definition of low birthweight in the large C8 Health Project.[115, 116] Recent
analysis of the Flemish Environmental Health Survey suggested that PFOA might amplify effects
of other environmental pollutants on low birth weight.[161]

A small number of epidemiological studies have evaluated associations between PFOA exposure
and altered development of reproductive tissue or time of puberty onset. A 2017 review of six
studies found that the most consistent evidence associated with higher PFOA exposure was later
age at menarche.[162] Early onset or delayed onset puberty are outcomes of concern because of
their association with risk of adult diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, and bone disease.[162]
Associations between higher serum PFOA and reduced testosterone levels in boys (six to nine
years old) and delayed puberty in girls (eight to eighteen years old) were observed in two cross-
sectional studies of children in the C8 Health Project.[106, 163] Another study population with high



                                                   34
levels of PFOA in drinking water near a fluoropolymer plant in Veneto, Italy reported that young
adult males exposed to high levels of PFOA prenatally and throughout childhood had reduced
testicular volume and penile length and shorter anogenital distance compared to a reference
population).[107] In studies in the general population with lower serum PFOA levels, age of
menarche in girls was associated with prenatal exposure in one study[164] but not another.[165] A
study of young adult Danish males (aged 19-21 years) born in 1988-89 reported associations
between prenatal PFOA exposure and lower sperm concentration, total sperm counts, and
higher serum levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH).[166]
Another Danish study by Ernst et al., 2019, evaluated a range of markers of pubertal
development in boys and girls in the longitudinal Danish National Birth Cohort. They reported
that prenatal PFOA level was not associated with any of the markers evaluated. However, both
inverse and positive associations were observed between various puberty markers and other
PFAS.[167] No association between maternal serum PFOA and anogenital distance in three-
month-old male Danish infants was observed in the longitudinal Odense Child Cohort.[168]

Several longitudinal birth cohort studies have investigated breastfeeding duration as an
outcome potentially associated with impaired mammary gland differentiation and development.
Fei et al. 2010, reported that higher serum PFOA levels in mothers during pregnancy was
associated with shorter durations of breastfeeding among multiparous women in the Danish
national birth cohort. Previous breastfeeding duration was not controlled for.[169] Since
pregnancy and lactation are demonstrated PFOA excretion pathways for women, studies
examining breastfeeding duration must carefully control for parity and prior breastfeeding
duration. Timmerman et al. 2017 reported that PFOA serum level in primiparous women in a
Faroe Islands cohort was associated with reduced duration of breastfeeding.[170] Ramono et al.
2016 also reported an association with reduced duration of breastfeeding in a Cincinnati cohort
that controlled for previous breastfeeding duration.[171] A larger cohort study by Rosen et al.
2018 in the Norwegian MoBa Cohort found no association between maternal serum PFOA and
breastfeeding duration and in fact observed longer breastfeeding durations associated with
some other PFAS. This study controlled for confounding by parity and prior breastfeeding
duration.[172]
There are limited skeletal observations in human studies. PFOA has been measured in bone in
adult human cadavers[5, 6] and associations have been reported between serum PFOA level and
lower bone density in women,[173] smaller bone mass and size in British girls,[174] and lower bone
mineral density in children in the Project Viva cohort assessed during mid-childhood. Impaired
bone accrual during childhood increases the risk of osteoporosis later in life.[175] In a case control
study of a Saudi women with osteoporosis, those with higher serum PFAS, including PFOA, had
higher odds of an osteoporosis diagnosis.[176]




                                                 35
A number of epidemiological studies have investigated neurodevelopmental outcomes
associated with elevated PFOA exposure. While a few studies reported positive associations with
hyperactivity[177, 178] most reported null or even inverse associations.[179-182]

Washington State Recommendation: 3 ng/kg-day
We selected the ATSDR’s MRL of 3 ng/kg–day based on developmental effects in mice as the
best basis for drinking water state action levels. In both the EPA and ATSDR evaluations,
developmental endpoints yielded health protective values that were as low as or lower than liver
injury and immunotoxicity endpoints.
There are sufficient supporting toxicity data demonstrating PFOA’s developmental toxicity in
fish, rats, mice, and monkeys.[4, 90] Epidemiological studies (discussed above) support an
association between gestational exposure to PFOA and small reductions in fetal growth in
humans. Epidemiological evidence is still limited regarding PFOA’s potential to alter time of
puberty, impair development of reproductive tissues, alter skeletal development, or produce
neurodevelopmental outcomes.
Sensitive subpopulations. While most studies of developmental toxicity in animals administered
PFOA during gestation, some studies have demonstrated that postnatal exposure alone resulted
in decreased postnatal growth and altered behavior in adulthood mature mice.[91, 183] Overall,
toxicity studies available for PFOA demonstrate that early life stages are sensitive to PFOA-
induced toxicity.[81] Based on the rodent data, we expect fetal and infant periods to have the
highest sensitivity to developmental effects. Later childhood developmental periods such as
puberty could also be sensitive as these are periods of rapid growth and development.
Relative Source Contribution (RSC): 50 percent
RSCs were developed for children and adults (see Table 2) with the subtraction method and the
EPA Exposure Decision Tree described in EPA’s methodology.[58] The RSCs for PFOA were
50 percent for infants, children, and adults. The target or reference serum at the PFOA MRL is
27.6 µg/L. The serum contribution from drinking water sources should not exceed 50 percent of
that target serum level: 13.8 µg/L (27.6 µg/L x 0.50).
Water Intake Rate: MDH model
As discussed in the Introduction to Approach and Methods, we used a Minnesota Department
of Health model with age-specific drinking water rates that includes transplacental and
lactational exposure routes in estimating exposure from PFOA in drinking water across the life
course.
We assumed age-specific water intake rates at the 90th percentile for chronic periods of
exposure (children >one year old and adulthood). We assumed 95th percentile drinking water
intake rates for lactating women and for formula-fed infants (assuming powdered formula is
mixed with tap water). Breastfed infants were assumed to be exclusively breastfed for six months
and then gradually tapered off breastmilk over the following six months while other foods and




                                                   36
drinks are introduced. Foods introduced include juices or infant formula mixed with tap water
(see Table 3).
The model outputs are provided below (Figure 5). A chronic drinking water level of 10 ng/L
PFOA was the maximum concentration that allowed serum levels of infants and children to
remain within the 50 percent RSC for drinking water sources. The peak serum level predicted for
breastfed infants as a result of 10 ng/L PFOA in drinking water was 13.4 µg/L. Formula-fed
infants peaked at 3.6 µg/L PFOA in serum. Maternal serum level attributed to drinking water at
the time of pregnancy was 2.6 µg/L and the expected starting serum for infants at birth was
2.3 µg/L.




                                              37
Figure 5. Model predicted PFOA serum level (mg/L) in A) formula-fed and B) breastfed infants resulting only
from exposure to PFOA in community drinking water. For formula-fed infants, 95th percentile water intake
was assumed for the first year followed by 90th percentile water intake during the rest of childhood and
adulthood. For breastfed infants, exclusive breastfeeding was assumed for the first six months with gradual
tapering until one year of age. After one year, breastfed infants are assumed to drink water at the 90th
percentile intake rate for their age group. The dotted lines represent the maximum allowable PFOA serum
level from drinking water only, as determined by the RSC for the age group. It represents the percentage
allotted to drinking water sources of the acceptable daily PFOA intake from all sources.




                                                    38
Deriving the State Action Level for PFOS
Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) has eight fully
fluorinated carbons with a sulfonic acid group at one
end. In drinking water, PFOS dissociates into its anion
form: perfluorooctane sulfonate (shown here). PFAS
substances that can breakdown to PFOS in the
environment are referred to as precursors. PFOS and
precursors were used to make consumer products
such as stain and water repellent textiles (clothing,
carpets, upholstery, tents, etc.), aftermarket stain and
waterproofing sprays, and food contact papers and                      Perfluorooctane sulfonate
            [4]
containers. PFOS and precursors have also been
used in aqueous film forming foams (AFFF) for firefighting and for a wide range of industrial and
consumer uses as surfactants and emulsifiers. In the U.S., manufacturing of PFOS and precursors
began in the 1940s and was mostly discontinued by the end of 2002.[15, 184] Some U.S.
commercial uses were allowed to continue (e.g., AFFF, metal plating, aviation fluids, photograph
development).[185] PFOS production also continued in other countries.[186] PFOS has no known
natural degradation pathway. It persists in the environment and can leach into groundwater
from surface soils.[48]
In national surveys, nearly every person tested has detectable levels of PFOS in their blood
serum.[14] The phase-out in U.S. production resulted in a decade of steady declines in serum
levels in the U.S. (see Figure 2). Between 1999-2000 and 2011-2012, there was a 78 percent
decline in the median serum PFOS level in the U.S. population. Since 2012, declines in mean
PFOS serum levels have flattened suggesting ongoing exposure.[13, 14] The CDC NHANES survey
of the U.S. general population (aged 12 and older) from 2017-18 reported 4.25 µg/L as the
mean PFOS serum level and 14.6 µg/L as the 95th percentile of the population distribution.[14]
Current U.S. exposures are thought to stem primarily from environmental and industrial
contamination of food and drinking water and from release of PFOS and precursors from older
products such as treated carpets and textiles in our homes.[4] PFOS bioaccumulates in humans
because it is so slowly excreted from the body. Estimates of average PFOS half-life in human
serum were 3.3—3.4 years in two studies of populations exposed to PFOS via contaminated
water.[17, 187] Men appear to have slower elimination rates than women.[17, 24]

The primary types of toxicity observed in experimental animals exposed to PFOS are
developmental toxicity,[188-190] immune suppression,[191-195] liver and kidney toxicity,[196-198] and
disruption of thyroid and other hormones.[199-203] PFOS does not appear to be mutagenic or
genotoxic but chronic rodent studies observed liver, thyroid and mammary gland tumors,[204]

The most consistent findings from human epidemiological studies are positive associations
between serum PFOS and higher serum cholesterol,[111, 205-207] reduced antibody response to


                                                   39
vaccines,[35, 99] and reduced birth weight.[208] Other endpoints of concern with less evidence
include elevated uric acid,[108, 109] altered energy metabolism and glucose intolerance,[209-211]
altered hormone levels,[212-214] thyroid disease,[113, 215, 216] and chronic kidney disease.[108, 217]

Data relevant to cancer risk of PFOS are limited. The EPA concluded there is “suggestive
evidence for carcinogenic potential” in humans based on liver and thyroid adenomas observed
in a chronic rat study by Butenhoff et al. 2012.[204] This study reported a dose-dependent
increase in hepatocellular adenomas in both male and female rats at the highest dose.[204]
Thyroid follicular cell adenomas and carcinomas were observed in both the male and female
rats; however, NJ DWQI and EPA evaluators concluded they were of unclear biological
significance and lacking a clear dose-response relationship.[184, 218] Mammary gland tumors in
female rats were observed but also lacked a dose-response pattern.[184] Epidemiological evidence
reviewed by ATSDR mostly did not find statistically significant increases in cancers associated
with PFOS exposure in occupational cohorts, the C8 health project, or the general population.[4]
The exception is mixed evidence of associations between breast cancer and PFOS in four case-
control studies. PFOS was positively associated with breast cancer in Greenland Inuit and
Taiwanese women.[219, 220] Two larger case-control studies of breast cancer in California and
Danish women found no such association.[127, 221]

Reviewing Health Protective Values
DOH reviewed the available health protective values for daily chronic human intake of PFOS. We
focused on high-quality and comprehensive risk evaluations that considered current scientific
research and were conducted by U.S. federal and state agencies. We focused on noncancer
effects (see page 13). Health protective values included reference doses (RfDs) derived by EPA
and the Minnesota Department of Health, a minimal risk level (MRL) derived by ATSDR, an
acceptable daily dose (ADD) derived by CA OEHHA and target serum levels derived by NJ DWQI
and NHDES. Target serum levels are analogous to an RfD except on a serum basis. These health
protective values are shown in Table 6 below.




                                                     40
                        Table 6: Health Protective Values for PFOS Reviewed by Washington
                                                                                                               Oral RfD,
                                                                                                               MRL, ADD,
                                                                         Human              Uncertainty        Target
             Critical                                                    Equivalent         Factors            Serum     Exposure
Source       study          Critical effect                              dose               (UF)a              Level b
                                                                                                                         duration
EPA          Luebker        NOAEL (0.1 mg/kg-day) for reduced            0.00051            UFtotal 30         20 ng/kg-        Chronic
2016[184]    et al.         pup weight and developmental delays          mg/kg-day                             day (RfD)
             2005a          in rats in a 2-generation rat study                             UFH =10
                            Average maternal serum level at                                 UFA =3
                            NOAEL: 6.26 mg/L

NJ           Dong et        NOAEL (0.0083 mg/kg-day) for                                    UFtotal 30          22.5 µg/L       Chronic
2018[218,    al. 2009       reduced immune response in adult                                                   (target
222]
                            mice (decreased plaque-forming cell                             UFH=10             serum level)c
                            response) dosed for 60-days.                                    UFA=3
Also                        Serum level measured 24 hrs. after                                                 1.8 ng/kg-
                            last dose at the                                                                   day
CA                          NOAEL: 0.675 mg/L                                                                  (RfD/ADD)d
OEHHA                       LOAEL: 7.1 mg/L
2019[132]
ATSDR        Luebker        NOAEL (0.1 mg/kg-day) for reduced            0.000515           UFtotal 300        2 ng/kg-day      Intermediate
2021[4]      et al.         pup weight and developmental delays          mg/kg-day                             (MRL)            (2-52 wks.)
             2005a          in rats in a 2-generation rat study                             UFH=10
                            TWA maternal serum level at the                                 UFA=3
                            NOAEL: 7.4 mg/L                                                 MF=10
                            LOAEL: 29.7 mg/L
MN           Dong et        NOAEL (0.0167 mg/kg-day) for                 0.000307           UFtotal 100        3.1 ng/kg-       Short-term
2019[73]     al. 2011       immune endpoints (increased IL-4             mg/kg-day                             day (RfD)        and chronic
                            cytokine production, reduced IgM                                UFH=10
                            antibody response to immunization)           (2.36 mg/L x       UFA=3
                            in adult male mice dosed for 60 days.        0.000128           UFD=3
                            Serum level measured 24 hrs. after           L/kg-day
                            last dose at the                             DAF)e
                            NOAEL: 2.36 mg/L
                            LOAEL: 10.75 mg/L
NH           Dong et        NOAEL (0.0167 mg/kg-day) for                                    UFtotal 100        23.6 µg/L        Chronic
2019[77,     al. 2011       immune endpoints (increased IL-4                                                   (target
131]
                            cytokine production, reduced IgM                                UFH=10             serum level)
                            antibody response to immunization)                              UFA=3
                            in adult male mice dosed for 60 days.                           UFD=3              3.0 ng/kg-
                            Serum level measured 24 hrs. after                                                 day (RfD)e
                            last dose at the
                            NOAEL: 2.36 mg/L
                            LOAEL: 10.75 mg/L
a Uncertainty factors: UF
                       H= intra-species uncertainty factor; UFA= inter-species uncertainty factor; UFS= subchronic to chronic uncertainty
factor; UFL= LOAEL to NOAEL uncertainty factor; UFD= incomplete database uncertainty factor; UFtotal= total (multiplied) uncertainty factor.




                                                                      41
Uncertainty factors are generally applied as factors of 1 (no adjustment), 3 or 10, with 3 and 10 representing a 0.5 and 1.0 log-unit. Because
individual UFs represent log-units, the product of two UFs of 3 is taken to be 10. MF = Modifying factor.
b RfD= Reference dose, MRL = minimal risk level, ADD = acceptable daily dose, target serum level is the concentration of the PFAS in serum

associated with an oral intake rate at the RfD or MRL.
c The target serum was calculated by dividing 0.675 mg/L (NOAEL) by 30 (UF
                                                                               total).
d The RfD of 1.8 ng/kg-day was calculated by multiplying the target serum by the clearance factor developed by EPA (2016): (8.1 x 10 -5 L/kg-

day x 22.5 µg/L = 0.00182 µg/kg-day or 1.8 ng/kg-day). CA OEHHA concurred with this approach.
e Minnesota derived a PFOS clearance factor for PFOS of 0.000128 L/Kg-day derived from a serum half-life of 1241 days (Li et al. 2018) and
volume of distribution 0.023 L/kg (EPA, 2016). New Hampshire concurred with this approach.



           EPA RfD and ATSDR MRL
           EPA and ATSDR both conducted detailed evaluations of the scientific literature relevant to PFOS.
           They derived their health protective values from a NOAEL of 0.1 mg/kg-day for developmental
           effects (decreased pup body weight) in a two-generation rat study by Luebker et al. 2005a[189]
           with support from Luebker et al. 2005b.[190]
           The Luebker et al. 2005a study exposed rats to PFOS over two generations and studied
           reproductive parameters, pup growth, developmental milestones, and neurobehavioral function.
           At the 0.4 mg/kg-day dose, the first generation of offspring had slight delays in eye opening
           and the second generation had slightly lower birthweights. At the two higher doses (1.6 and 3.2
           mg/kg-day), pups showed impaired development and excess mortality. All the pups at the
           higher dose died. Only the pups from the 0.1 and 0.4 mg/kg-day doses were in acceptable
           condition to continue in the study and complete the second cycle of breeding. After weaning, a
           subset of males and females from the first generation of offspring were tested on learning and
           memory tasks. No differences were observed on tasks related to learning or memory at PFOS
           doses of 0.1 and 0.4 mg/kg-day. The LOAEL for slight developmental effects was 0.4 mg/kg-day
           and the NOAEL was 0.1 mg/kg-day.[189]
           A second reproductive and developmental study (one-generation study design) by Luebker et
           al. 2005b used additional doses in the low dose range to better define the dose-response and
           to support benchmark dose modeling of a minimal response in the observed outcome.[190]
           Administered doses were 0, 0.4, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.6, and 2.0 mg/kg-day. Dosing of female rats
           occurred for six weeks prior to mating with untreated males, through mating, gestation, and
           four days of lactation. Reduced birth weight and weight gain was observed in pups at all PFOS
           doses in the absence of any differences in maternal weight gain during pregnancy. The BMDL
           for a 5 percent reduction in the mean birth weight per litter was a maternal dose of 0.39 mg/kg-
           day. Again, reduced pup survival at the higher doses was observed. Over 70 percent of the dams
           at the 2.0 mg/kg-day dose had all pups die within five days of birth. The BMDL for a 5 percent
           decrease in survival of pups between postnatal days one and five was a maternal dose of 0.89
           mg/kg-day. Serum total thyroxine (tT4), measured at lactation day five, was sharply reduced in
           dams and pups at all doses tested without a statistically significant change in TSH. However,
           thyroid hormone results were not consistent across two measurement methods employed.



                                                                       42
Gestational length was also shorter in a dose-dependent manner in both Luebker et al.
experiments.

The NOAEL in Luebker et al. 2005a was 0.1 mg/kg-day. EPA applied toxicokinetic models to
estimate an average maternal serum level at the NOAEL (6.26 mg/L) and to estimate daily intake
in people that would result in an average equivalent serum level. Their clearance factor was 8.1 x
10-5 L/kg-day (assumed volume of distribution was 0.23 L/kg and serum half-life was 5.4 years).
This estimated daily intake, called the human equivalent dose, was 0.00051 mg/kg-day. It is
much lower than the daily dose in rats required to reach this same average serum level because
PFOS is much more bioaccumulative in humans than in rats. EPA applied a 30-fold uncertainty
factor consisting of a ten-fold factor (UFH) to account for variability in individual human
responses and a three-fold factor (UFA) to account for differences between rats and humans.[184]
EPA also evaluated other endpoints and derived candidate RfDs based on elevated biomarkers
of liver damage in rats and monkeys from Seacat et al. 2002 and 2003,[198, 223] developmental
neurotoxicity in rats from Butenhoff et al. 2009,[224] and reduced pup weight and neonatal
mortality in another rat study by Lau et al. 2003.[188] The RfD from the Luebker et al. study was
lower than or equal to the other RfDs and was carried forward in the risk assessment. For
immunotoxicity, EPA concluded that “Taken together, the lower antibody titers associated with
PFOS levels in humans and the consistent suppression of sheep red blood cell response in
animals indicates a concern for adverse effects on the immune system. However, lack of human
dosing information and lack of low-dose confirmation of effects in animals for the short
duration study precludes the use of these immunotoxicity data in setting the RfD.”[184]
Risk assessors at ATSDR also selected developmental effects as the most sensitive effect that
they were confident modeling. ATSDR modeled a time-weighted average for maternal serum
level at the LOAEL and NOAEL in Luebker et al. 2005a and reported these as 29.7 and 7.4 mg/L
respectively.[4] They concurred with EPA that immunotoxicity was observed in mice at doses 1-10
times lower than the developmental endpoint selected. ATSDR did not have the necessary
pharmacological data to estimate time-weighted average serum concentration over the 60-day
dosing period in the strain of mice used by Dong et al. Instead they applied a ten-fold
modifying factor to account for insufficient pharmacological data in critical studies for
immunotoxicity. In support of this 10-fold factor ATSDR calculated a “candidate MRL” of 3
ng/kg-day based on the NOAEL for immune toxicity in Dong et al 2011.[4]
New Jersey Target Serum and CA OEHHA ADD
Mouse studies have shown that PFOS exposure reduces antibody responses to sheep red blood
cell antigen, reduces survival after exposure to influenza A virus, alters immune cell populations,
and suppresses immune function in adult mice.[191-195] When mice received PFOS exposure
during pregnancy, similar immune effects were observed in their offspring at eight weeks of
age.[225] State risk assessments (MN, NJ, NH, CA) based their health protective values on
immunotoxicity endpoints in mice in Dong et al. 2009 or 2011, which are descried briefly below.
A key assay used in these studies, the sheep erythrocyte T-dependent antibody response (or


                                                43
TDAR), evaluates the ability of animals sensitized in vivo to produce primary IgM antibodies to
sheep red blood cells (SRBC). This assay is highly regarded as a sensitive indicator of functional
immunosuppression in animals and is relevant to adaptive humoral immunity in humans. Assay
response requires antigen recognition and presentation, T cell and B cell signaling, and class
switching, and thus can detect immunosuppression across a range of cell types and signals.[35]
NJ DWQI selected Dong et al. 2009 as the critical study to derive an RfD based on evidence of
immune suppression in adult male mice. This study dosed male C57BL/6N mice for 60 days by
oral gavage. The NOAEL (0.008 mg/kg-day) and LOAEL (0.083 mg/kg-day) resulted in serum
PFOS levels at the completion of the dosing of 0.67 and 7.1 mg/L, respectively. At and above the
LOAEL, SRBC-specific IgM plaque forming cell response was reduced in a dose-dependent
manner. Natural killer cell activity was increased by 38 percent at the LOAEL but was decreased
compared to controls at the higher doses. Higher doses also reduced body weights, organ
weights (kidney, thymus and spleen), and reduced thymic and splenic cellularity. The LOAELs for
immune suppression were also LOAELs for increased liver weight in this study. NJ applied a ten-
fold uncertainty factor for human variability (UFH) and a three-fold factor to account for
uncertainty in applying mouse data to humans (UFA).[191] CA OEHHA concurred with this
approach and adopted 1.8 ng/kg-day as their ADD for PFOS (see Table 6).
Minnesota RfD and New Hampshire Target Serum
Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) selected a different critical study by Dong et al.
2011.[192] This 60-day companion study was similar to Dong et al. 2009 but it evaluated the
balance of cytokines associated with T-helper cell subsets (TH1 and TH2) that may underlie the
reduced IgM response to SRBC antigen. The study observed a dose-related suppression of
SRBC-specific IgM synthesis in adult male mice immunized with SRBC. In this experiment, IgM
antibodies were assessed in the serum by ELIZA rather than by plaque forming cell response.
Serum levels of IgG and IgE were elevated at the highest dose.[192] Cytokine evaluation showed
increased IL-4 cytokine levels in the spleen and a pronounced shift to a more TH2-type dominant
immune state with excess type 2 immune responses and deficient type 1 immune responses.
Suppressed IgM response in this TDAR study had the same LOAEL as Dong et al. 2009 (0.0083
mg/kg-day). The NOAEL (0.0167 mg/kg-day) in Dong et al 2011 was slightly higher as the
second experiment added an extra dose group in the low dose range.

MDH derived an RfD as follows. The serum concentration at the NOAEL (2.36 mg/L) was
multiplied by a dosimetric adjustment factor (DAF) to calculate a human equivalent dose. The
DAF (0.00013 L/kg-day) assumed a half-life of 1241 days (3.4 years) for PFOS in human serum
and a volume of distribution of 0.23 L/kg. The human equivalent dose was 0.000307 mg/kg-day.
MDH applied a total uncertainty factor of 100 that included a three-fold factor for database
uncertainty (UFD) based on the need for a more complete assessment of developmental
exposures and immune effects and T4 thyroid hormone reductions. MDH noted that two studies
in developing rats reported decreased serum thyroxine (T4) in dams and pups at serum levels
equivalent to the NOAEL of Dong et al 2011.[203, 226] MDH’s resulting RfD was 3.1 ng/kg-day.[73]



                                                44
NHDES concurred with Minnesota’s inputs and approach. The NHDES target serum was 24 ug/L
and their associated RfD was 3.0 ng/kg-day. The NHDES RfD differs slightly because MDH
rounded their DAF and NHDES did not.[77]
Discussion of Uncertainties
Risk evaluators relied on different estimates of half-life for PFOS in humans when deriving
human equivalent doses. ATSDR and EPA relied on an estimate of serum half-life reported from
retired fluorochemical workers in Olsen et al 2007.[101] This study collected periodic blood
samples from 24 male and two female workers over a five-year period. Initial mean PFOS level in
serum of participants was 799 µg/L. MDH and NHDES used a serum half-life from Li et al. 2018,
a study of 106 residents of Ronneby, Sweden (age 4–84 years, 53 percent female) who were
exposed to PFOS in their municipal drinking water.[17] Samples were collected periodically over a
two year period. Median initial serum PFOS level in the group was 345 µg/L (range 24–1500
µg/L). The drinking water exposure scenario and the wider representation of all ages and
women in this cohort make it better suited to our transgenerational model for exposure
assessment which includes maternal placental transfer and breastfeeding exposures from
drinking water.

Risk evaluators differed in their selection of the critical study for suppressed immune response.
Both Dong et al. 2009 and Dong et al. 2011 observed a LOAEL at 0.083 mg/kg-day for impaired
immune response to SRBC in male adult mice exposed to PFOS for 60 days. The two metrics
used - IgM suppression and plaque forming cell response - describe different aspects of the
same immune process and taken together support a POD at the NOAEL for this endpoint.
ATSDR, MN and NH concurred that the intermediate dose included in the Dong et al. 2011
study provides more granular information about the NOAEL and was suitable as a point of
departure.

MDH and NHDES concurred on a 3-fold UF for database uncertainty in part due to the
emerging evidence on thyroid hormone disruption and its potential impact on
neurodevelopment which has not been well studied. We agree with this UF and note that a
number of in vitro and in vivo animal models, recently reviewed by Coperchini et al. 2021,
indicate that PFOS has thyroid disrupting effects on circulating thyroid hormone levels, thyroid
signaling, the structure of thyroid follicular cells, and early brain development in Xenopus
embyros.[227]
Human Relevance
Both immune and developmental endpoints have supporting epidemiological data to indicate
their relevance for humans.
In adults and children, PFOS exposure has been associated with suppressed antibody response
to vaccines in a number of studies in different populations.[228-232] For example, an investigation
of childhood response to vaccines from birth cohorts in the Faroe Islands showed that PFOS
exposure was associated with lower antibody responses to childhood diphtheria and tetanus


                                                 45
immunizations.[228] These authors reported a 39 percent decrease in diphtheria antibody
concentrations at age five for each doubling of the PFOS exposure in maternal serum.
Additionally, higher serum PFOS at age five correlated with greater risk of falling below clinically
protective serum levels for both tetanus and diphtheria antibodies at age seven.[228]

There are limited studies of PFOS exposure and the risk of infectious disease. In several
longitudinal birth cohort studies, higher prenatal PFOS exposure (measured in maternal or cord
blood) correlated with indicators of increased infectious disease during childhood including:
higher risk of hospitalization for infectious disease for girls but not boys,[233] higher number of
days with fever,[234] and more lower respiratory tract infections.[235, 236] No association with
prevalence of allergies and infectious diseases was observed in children followed to age seven in
the Hokkaido longitudinal study.[237] A cross-sectional study in the C8 study population did not
find associations between PFOS and the frequency of cold or flu infections in adults.[238] Overall,
the evidence for altered risk of infectious disease is mixed and inconclusive. More studies that
stratify by sex may be important in clarifying whether PFOS exposure affects the risk of
infections.

The National Toxicology Program conducted a systematic review in 2016 of evidence for
immune toxicity from epidemiological studies and studies in experimental animals and
concluded that PFOS met their criteria of a “presumed immune hazard” in humans.[99] This was
based on high confidence that PFOS is immunotoxic in rodents and moderate evidence of
immunotoxicity in humans. Specifically that “the results present a consistent pattern of findings
that higher prenatal, childhood, and adult serum concentrations of PFOS were associated with
suppression in at least one measure of the anti-vaccine antibody response to common vaccines
across multiple studies.”[99]
A large number of epidemiological studies have evaluated associations between PFOS and
developmental/reproductive outcomes. See reviews by EPA in 2016 and ATSDR in 2021.[4, 184]
Two meta-analyses of epidemiological studies support an association between PFOS and lower
birth weights. A systematic review by Koustas et al. 2014 found higher PFOS exposure was
consistently associated with lower birth weights.[208] A meta-analysis of seven studies by Verner
et al. 2015 reported that overall, for every increase of 1 µg/L in prenatal serum PFOS, there was a
five gram reduction in birthweight of babies.[157] Verner et al. investigated possible confounding
of this association by the mother’s glomerular filtration rate (i.e., women with lower GFR during
pregnancy would tend to have smaller babies and higher blood PFOS levels). Their results
indicate that GFR may explain some but not all of the association.[157] Two newer studies
measured maternal PFOS early in pregnancy when GFR is less likely to confound results on
birthweight. Meng et al. 2018 reported that for every doubling of PFOS in maternal serum,
birthweight declined 45 grams in a study in the Danish National Birth Cohort.[98] Wikstrom et al.
2020, reported that maternal serum PFOS was associated with reduced birth weight and small



                                                  46
for gestational age in a prospective birth cohort. In age-stratified results, the association was
stronger in girls.[155].

In the Danish National Birth Cohort, the odds ratios of preterm birth were about two-fold higher
in the top three quartiles for maternal PFOS exposure compared to the lowest quartile.[98] In the
large C8 Health Project cohort, PFOS serum level was associated with self-reported preeclampsia
and low birth weight (defined as birth weight < 2,500 g), but not with preterm-birth or
miscarriage in the previous five-year period within the cohort.[117] Two follow-up studies in the
C8 study cohort by Darrow et al. evaluated reproductive outcomes following serum PFAS
measurement in women (99 percent of the births occurred within three years of serum
collection).[239, 240] These studies found no association between preconception PFOS maternal
serum level and low birth weight babies (defined as < 2,500 g) or pre-term births. However,
higher PFOS exposure was associated with slightly lower birth weights and with higher risk of
pregnancy-induced hypertension.[239] There was no association with miscarriage among
pregnancies overall but a slight association with PFOS and miscarriage in nulliparous women.[240]
There was no evidence of birth defects or increased risk of stillbirths evident in over 10,000
births evaluated as part of the C8 Health Study cohort.[117, 165]
Only limited and mixed evidence is available on timing of pubertal developmental in children.
PFOS serum level in girls was associated with delayed menarche in a cross-sectional study in the
C8 study cohort.[106] Doubling of serum PFOS level was inversely associated with serum
testosterone in boys and estradiol in girls indicating delayed sexual maturation.[106] A
prepubertal cohort (ages six to nine years) from the same C8 study population had similar
inverse associations between serum PFOS and estradiol, testosterone, and insulin-like growth
factor-1 in boys. Girls had similar results for testosterone and insulin-like growth factor-1.[163]
Prenatal PFOS exposure was associated with decreased odds of earlier age at menarche in a
British birth cohort[165] and no association with markers of puberty in girls or boys in two other
studies.[164, 166] Ernst et al. 2019 reported a non-monotonic pattern for prenatal PFOS exposure
and markers of puberty in girls in the Danish National Birth Cohort (n= 1167 children).[167]
Compared to the lowest tertile of exposure, girls in the middle tertile had lower age of onset for
most pubertal milestones measured. Some of the markers however showed higher age at onset
when comparing the third tertile with the lowest tertile. In boys, the estimated average age of
onset for most pubertal markers was slightly reduced in the second and third tertiles of PFOS
prenatal exposure compared to the lowest exposure tertile.[167]

Washington State Recommendation: 3.0 ng/kg-day
We concurred with MDH and NHDES on their derivation of the RfD for PFOS based on immune
effects in Dong et al. 2011. The RfD without rounding of the DAF is 3.0 ng/kg-day. While rodents
are sensitive to both immune and developmental effects of PFOS, reduced antibody response to
an antigen appears to be a more sensitive endpoint. Serum levels in mice at the LOAEL in Dong
et al. 2011 were similar to the serum levels in rats at the NOAEL for developmental effects in



                                                  47
Luebker et al 2005a. While there are uncertainties in the toxicokinetics for the mouse strains
used in various immune studies, the critical study, Dong et al. 2011, measured PFOS levels in
mouse serum at the end of the experiment. The experiment was 60 days long and was
supported by two other 60-day studies in the same strain of mouse with similar serum
measurements indicating reproducibility (Dong et al. 2009 and 2012).[191, 241]
TDAR assays, like the one used in Dong et al. 2011, are validated, well regarded evidence of
immune suppression and are relevant to humans.[35] In adults and children, PFOS exposure has
been associated with suppressed antibody response to vaccines in a number of studies in
different populations (see discussion under Human Relevance). The 2016 systematic review by
the National Toxicology Program supports the relevance of reduced antigen response in
laboratory animals to reduced antibody response to vaccines in children and adults.[99]
Sensitive populations. Infants and children are sensitive life stages for immune effects associated
with PFOS exposure. Infants and children receive a number of vaccinations to protect them from
serious infectious diseases before the age of five. Suppressed antibody production erodes the
protection of vaccines and represents a functional decrease in interception and clearance of
infectious agents. Failure to reach a clinically protective antibody response puts children at risk
for serious infectious diseases. The studies in mice indicate that adult male mice are sensitive to
antibody suppression associated with PFOS exposure so we considered human adults a target
population for protection. Sensitive subgroups of adults may include people with autoimmune
and other immune deficits. Immune function naturally declines with age so older adults could
also be at increased risk.
Relative Source contribution (RSC): 50 percent infants, 20 percent adults
RSCs were developed for children and adults (see Table 2) with the subtraction method and the
EPA Exposure Decision Tree as described in our Introduction to Approach and Methods section.
The RSCs for PFOS were 50 percent for infants and children, 35 percent for women of
childbearing age, and 20 percent for all adults (both sexes). The lower RSC for adults is a result
of the higher background PFOS serum levels in men in the general population. Because the
immune effects in rodents were observed in adult male rodents, we used a 20 percent RSC for
all adult populations (the lower of the two RSCs for adults). The target or reference serum at the
RfD is 23.6 µg/L. At 20 percent RSC for adults, the contribution from drinking water should not
exceed 4.7 µg/L in the serum (23.6 µg/L x 0.20). For infants and children, we used a 50 percent
RSC. The serum contribution from drinking water should not exceed 11.8 µg/L for PFOS.
Minnesota and New Hampshire also followed the Exposure Decision Tree approach described in
EPA’s methodology (USEPA 2000) and the subtraction or the percentage method to derive RSCs.
Minnesota derived an RSC of 50 percent for infant and young children and an RSC of 20 percent
for chronic exposure in adult populations. New Hampshire derived an RSC of 50 percent. EPA.
ATSDR, and CA OEHHA all set the PFOS RSC at 20 percent.




                                                48
Water Intake Rate: MDH model
As discussed in the Introduction to Approach and Methods section, we used a Minnesota
Department of Health model and age-specific drinking water intake rates to estimate serum
levels in children, resulting from PFOS in community drinking water. The model includes
placental and lactational transfer to offspring of mothers that are chronically exposed to the
drinking the water. The model also estimates exposure to infants fed formula mixed with
drinking water that contains PFOS.[73]

We assumed age-specific drinking water intake rates at the 90th percentile for chronic periods of
exposure (children >one year old through adulthood). Following birth, we assumed 95th
percentile drinking water intake for lactating women, and the 95th percentile drinking water
ingestion rates for formula-fed infants (assuming powdered formula is mixed with tap water).
Breastfed infants were assumed to be exclusively breastfed for six months and then gradually
tapered off breastmilk over the following six months with other foods and drinks introduced
including juices or infant formula mixed with tap water.

The model outputs are shown in Figure 6. A chronic drinking water level of 15 ng/L PFOS was
the maximum concentration that allowed serum levels of adults to remain within the 20 percent
RSC for drinking water sources. At this concentration in drinking water, infants and children
remained below the 50 percent RSC. Maternal PFOS level at time of pregnancy (4.3 µg/L) was
used to calculate the starting serum at birth for infants (maternal serum x placental transfer
ratio), which was 1.7 µg/L. The peak serum level predicted for breastfed infants resulting from
15 ng/L PFOS in drinking water was 8.6 µg/L. Formula-fed infants peaked at 4.1 µg/L PFOS in
serum.




                                                49
Figure 6. Model predicted PFOS serum level (mg/L) in A) formula-fed and B) breastfed infants resulting only
from exposure to PFOS in community drinking water. For formula-fed infants, 95th percentile water intake
was assumed for the first year followed by 90th percentile water intake during the rest of childhood and
adulthood. For breastfed infants, exclusive breastfeeding was assumed for the first six months with gradual
tapering until one year of age. After one year, breast-fed infants are assumed to drink water at the 90th
percentile intake rate. The dotted lines represent the maximum allowable PFOS serum level from drinking
water only, as determined by the RSC for the age group. It represents the percentage allotted to drinking
water sources of the acceptable daily PFOS intake from all sources.



                                                    50
Deriving the State Action Level for PFNA
Perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA) has eight fully
fluorinated carbons and a carboxylic acid group
at one end. In drinking water, PFNA typically
occurs as its anion perfluorononanoate (shown
here). PFNA was primarily used as a processing
aid to make a fluoropolymer called polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF).[242] PFNA may be present in PVDF
at low concentrations (100-200 ppm). PVDF is
used as a liner of industrial chemical tanks and
pipes, a coating for internal electronic                              Perfluorononanoate
components, and in biomedical membranes,
monofilament fishing line, and architectural coatings.[242] PFNA was phased out of U.S.
production in 2015 under an EPA stewardship agreement.[15] Possible PFNA precursor chemicals
include 8:2 FTOH (fluorotelomer alcohol) and 8:2 diPAP (polyfluoroalkyl phosphoric acid diester)
that are used in textile coatings and grease proof food contact papers.[242]
PFNA and precursors have been released to the environment from manufacturing plants and
from industrial, commercial and consumer products.[3, 242] Once released into the environment,
PFNA can persist for decades, bind to and leach from soil, and be transported in ground, surface
and ocean waters.[4, 242] Additionally, volatile precursors, such as 8:2 FTOH, can be transported
great distances in air and degrade to PFNA under specific conditions.[243] PFNA has been
detected in drinking water near a PVDF manufacturing plant in NJ.[242] PFNA has been
occasionally detected in public water systems impacted by AFFF firefighting foam, including in
Washington State.[244, 245]
PFNA is widely detected at low levels in blood serum of the general U.S. population. In the 2015-
16 NHANES survey by the CDC, mean and 95th percentile serum concentrations were 0.58 µg/L
and 1.90 µg/L respectively.[68] Diet is considered the major source of exposure in humans.[246]
Drinking water may also be a significant contributor to human exposure. For example, residents
in Paulsboro, New Jersey who had PFNA in their drinking water had a mean serum level of PFNA
nearly four times higher than the national norm.[18] PFNA bioaccumulates in people. Estimates of
elimination half-life in human serum range from 2.5-4.3 years.[25, 26] PFNA concentration in
maternal blood serum correlates with PFNA in umbilical cord serum and in breastmilk.[11]
The toxicity of PFNA is less studied than PFOA or PFOS, but the general types of rodent toxicity
observed are similar.[4, 94, 247] Mice and rats are sensitive to liver toxicity from PFNA. Liver effects
include increased liver weight, hepatocellular hypertrophy, increased serum liver enzymes, and
liver cell damage/necrosis.[94, 248-251] PFNA also affects reproductive tissues and function. Oral
PFNA administration reduced testosterone levels, altered sperm concentration and motility,
reduced male fertility, and produced degenerative changes in the testes and seminiferous
tubules of male rodents.[94, 252-254] In female rodents, it reduced the fertility index, pregnancy rate,



                                                  51
and the number of live pups at birth.[251, 255] Developmental toxicity observed with PFNA
exposure included reduced growth, delayed development, and reduced survival of pups.[249, 255-
257]
     Immunotoxicity observed in male rodents includes reduced spleen and thymus weights,
apoptosis in thymocytes and splenocytes, and altered cytokines involved with immune system
function in the spleen.[94, 258-260] PFNA reduced serum thyroid hormones (total T4 and free T4) in
male and female rats orally exposed to PFNA for 28 days without a concomitant rise in TSH.2 [94]
Epidemiological studies relevant to PFNA were reviewed by NJ DWQI (2015) and ATSDR (2021).[4,
261]
     There is limited evidence that higher PFNA exposure in humans is associated with increased
serum cholesterol, increased serum liver enzymes, and decreased bilirubin levels;[150, 262, 263]
immune suppression including reduced antibody response to vaccinations in children and
adults;[229, 231, 236, 264] reproductive effects including preterm birth;[98, 265-267] and developmental
effects including lower birth weight, altered bone density and timing of puberty.[163, 167, 174, 265]
These findings have not been sufficiently studied or consistently observed. Most of the
epidemiological studies compared serum levels of multiple PFAS to the endpoint of concern.
Associations between PFNA and a health outcome were often reported for other PFAS as well.
No lifetime rodent assay for cancer was identified. A single case-control study in humans found
no association between serum levels of PFNA and prostate cancer.[129]

Review of Health Protective Values
DOH reviewed the available health protective values for daily chronic human intake of PFNA. We
focused on high-quality and comprehensive risk evaluations that considered current scientific
research and were conducted by U.S. federal and state agencies. These included a target serum
level derived by NJ DWQI, a minimal risk level (MRL) derived by ATSDR, and RfDs developed
NHDES and the Michigan Science Advisory Workgroup (MSWG).

These values are presented in Table 7 below.




2
 Thyroxine (T4) is the primary thyroid hormone produced by the thyroid gland. Most of serum T4 is bound
to proteins, but free T4 is unbound and can travel into tissues where it is converted to triiodothyronine
(T3), which is the active form of the hormone. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is produced by the
pituitary gland and stimulates hormone production by the thyroid gland.


                                                   52
                      Table 7. Health Protective Values for PFNA Reviewed by Washington
                                                             Human           Uncertainty       Oral RfD, MRL,
                    Critical                                 Equivalent      Factors           Target Serum               Exposure
Source              study         Critical effect            Dose            (UF)a             Levelb                     duration
NJ                  Das et al.    BMDL10 for increased                       UFtotal 1000      4.9 µg/L (target           Chronic
2015[242]           2015          liver weight in mouse                                        serum level)
                                  dams at GD-17                              UFH=10
                                  following gestational                      UFA=3
                                  exposure.                                  UFS=10
                                                                             UFD=3
                                  LOEL: 1 mg/kg-day.
                                  Maternal serum level
                                  at BMDL10: 4.9 mg/L.
ATSDR               Das et al.    NOAEL of 1 mg/kg-          0.001           UFtotal 300       3 ng/kg-day (MRL)          Intermediate
2021[4]             2015          day for reduced pup        mg/kg-day                                                    (2–52 wks.)
                                  weight and                                 UFH=10
                                  developmental delays       (6.8 mg/L x     UFA=3
                                  in mice. Modeled TWA       DAFc)           MFD=10
                                  maternal serum at
                                  NOAEL: 6.8 mg/L
                                  LOAEL: 10.9 mg/L
NH                  Das et al.    BMDL10 for increased                       UFtotal 100       49 µg/L                    Chronic
2019                2015          liver weight in mouse                                        (target serum
[77, 131]                         dams at GD-17                              UFH=10            level)
                                  following gestational                      UFA=3
                                  exposure.                                  UFD=3
                                                                                                 4.3 ng/kg-day
                                   LOEL: 1 mg/kg-day.
                                                                                                 (RfD)d
                                   Maternal serum level
                                   at BMDL10 : 4..9 mg/L
MSWG                  Das et al.   NOAEL of 1 mg/kg-           0.000665        UFtotal 300       2.2 ng/kg-day          Chronic
2019 [268]            2015         day for reduced pup         mg/kg-day                         (RfD)
                                   weight and                                  UFH=10
                                   developmental delays        (6.8 mg/L x     UFA=3
                                   in mice. Modeled TWA        DAFe)           UFD=10
                                   maternal serum at
                                   NOAEL: 6.8 mg/L
                                   LOAEL: 10.9 mg/L
aUncertainty factors: UF = intra-species uncertainty factor; UF = inter-species uncertainty factor; UF = subchronic to chronic
                         H                                       A                                      S
uncertainty factor; UFL= LOAEL to NOAEL uncertainty factor; UFD= incomplete database uncertainty factor; UFtotal= total
(multiplied) uncertainty factor. Uncertainty factors are generally applied as factors of 1 (no adjustment), 3 or 10, with 3 and 10
representing a 0.5 and 1.0 log-unit. Because individual UFs represent log-units, the product of two UFs of 3 is taken to be 10.
MF=modifying factor.
bRfD is a reference dose, MRL is a minimal risk level, target serum level is analogous to an RfD except on a serum basis.
cATSDR dosimetric adjustment factor (DAF) = V x (Ln(2)/T ) = 0.2 L/kg x (Ln(2)/900 days) =1.54 x 10-4 L/kg – day. ATSDR
                                                 d           1/2
paired their developmental POD with the shorter serum half-life for women of reproductive age from Zhang et al 2013.
dNHDES dosimetric adjustment factor = V x (Ln(2)/T ) = 0.2L/kg x (Ln(2)/1570 days) = 0.883 x 10-4 L/kg-day. NH used a half-
                                            d          1/2
life estimate for older women and men from Zhang et al 2013.
eMSWG dosimetric adjustment factor (DAF) = DAF = V                                                               L/kg-day.
                                                       d x (Ln(2)/T1/2) = 0.2L/kg x (Ln(2)/1417 days) = 0.978 x 10
                                                                                                                     -4

Serum half-life of 1417 days the arithmetic mean from Zhang et al 2013 of serum half-life in women of reproductive years and
serum half-life in older women and men.




                                                                   53
ATSDR, NJ DWQI, NHDES, and MSWG selected the same critical study, but the three
assessments differed in the endpoint selected, the human serum half-life estimate for PFNA
and/or the uncertainty factors applied. The critical study is described below.
Das et al. 2015,[249] is a development study in which bred female CD-1 mice received daily oral
PFNA dosing (at 1, 3, 5 or 10 mg/kg-day) from gestation days (GD) 1-17. Dams were evaluated
for overt signs of toxicity, growth, and reproductive impairment. Some fetuses were evaluated
for skeletal and visceral birth anomalies on GD 16. Live-born pups were evaluated for abnormal
development through puberty and their growth and survival was monitored through postnatal
day (PND) 287. Serum and liver levels of PFNA were measured at multiple time points
throughout the experiment in dams, fetuses, and pups.
Pregnant mice at the highest dose (10 mg/kg-day) lost weight and all had full litter resorptions.
They were sacrificed at GD 13 and removed from the rest of the experiment.
Eighty percent of the pups in the 5 mg/kg-day dose group died between PND 2 -10. At and
above 3 mg/kg-day, surviving pups showed statistically significant dose-dependent delays in
reaching developmental milestones (eye opening, preputial separation, and vaginal opening).
Pups alive at PND 24 (time of weaning) showed dose-dependent reductions in body weight.
Reduced growth in male mice persisted to PND 287 (statistically significant ≥ 3 mg/kg-day).
Female body weights were less affected and recovered to control levels by seven weeks of
age.[249]
Maternal and fetal liver weights were higher than controls in all treatment groups. At delivery,
there were no reductions in birthweight, skeletal abnormalities, or visceral abnormalities (except
liver). The study did not report whether elevated liver enzymes or other signs of liver damage
accompanied an increase in liver weight. Gene expression in liver tissue was evaluated at five
time points in fetal and pup livers. PFNA induced a clear PPARα-dependent gene expression
profile, but activation of other nuclear receptors (CAR and PXR3) were also evident in the liver of
the mouse offspring. Upregulation of genes waned after PND 24 as body burden declined in
pups.[249] This observation was similar to a fuller investigation of gene expression by Rosen et al.
2017, which showed that PPARα was the main target for PFNA in mouse liver with minor
activation of genes associated with CAR, ERα, and PPARγ.4 [269]
ATSDR MRL
ATSDR selected the NOAEL for adverse effects on development (reduced growth and delayed
development in pups exposed prenatally) in the Das et al. study as the point of departure. They

3
 Constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) and Pregane X receptor (PXR) are nuclear receptors and function
as sensors of endogenous and xenobiotic substances. When activated, they upregulate genes involved
with metabolism and excretion and are important receptors for detoxification and clearance of drugs and
other foreign substances.
4
 Estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) is a nuclear receptor activated by estrogen. Peroxiosme proliferator-
activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) is a nuclear receptor that controls expression of a number of genes
related to metabolism and development.


                                                  54
estimated time-weighted average (TWA) maternal serum levels of PFNA across pregnancy to
define the serum level associated with each dose group. The TWA serum level was 6.8 mg/L at
the NOAEL. ATSDR also considered two other developmental toxicity studies for developmental
points of departure.[255, 257] Wolf et al. 2010, observed decreased litter size and pup survival in
mice exposed during gestation (GD 1-18). The TWA maternal serum level was estimated to be
11.6 mg/L at the LOAEL (1.1 mg/kg-day) and 4.47 mg/L at the NOAEL (0.83 mg/kg-day).[255]
Rogers et al. 2014 reported decreased birthweight and increased blood pressure and kidney
effects at ten weeks of age in rat offspring exposed to PFNA during gestation (GD 1-20) at a
LOAEL of 5 mg/kg-day. A TWA maternal serum could not be calculated.[257]
ATSDR derived a human equivalent dose (0.001 mg/kg day) which is daily intake rate expected
to result in a serum level of 6.8 mg/L at steady state. ATSDR selected a half-life estimate of
2.5 years for women of reproductive age in a study by Zhang et al 2013.[25] ATSDR
acknowledged that the MRL is not specific to this subpopulation, but deemed it appropriate to
use a half-life associated with women of childbearing age when calculating the human
equivalent dose expected to produce the same PFNA concentration in women’s serum at the
time of pregnancy. The human equivalent dose was divided by 300 to derive an MRL of
0.000003 mg/kg-day or 3 ng/kg-day. Uncertainty factors included a ten-fold factor for human
variability and a three-fold factor for differences between mice and humans. ATSDR applied a
ten-fold modifying factor for database limitations because of the limited scope and number of
studies that evaluated intermediate-chronic duration exposures, suggestive evidence from Singh
and Singh (2018) that reproductive toxicity may be a more sensitive endpoint, and the lack of
longer duration immunotoxicity testing for PFNA. Average steady state human serum level at
the MRL was estimated to be 22.7 µg/L (6.8 mg/L ÷ 300 = 0.0227 mg/L).
ATSDR did not consider increased liver weight at the lowest dose in Das et al. as adverse or
relevant for human health risk assessment. ATSDR applied the Hall et al., 2012 criteria[144] to liver
effects observed and concluded that “doses associated with increases in liver weight and
hepatocellular hypertrophy were not considered adverse effect levels for the purpose of human
risk assessment unless hepatocellular degenerative or necrotic changes or evidence of biliary or
other liver cell damage were also present.”[4]

New Jersey Target Serum
NJ DWQI based their health protective value on increased maternal liver weight at GD 17 in Das
et al 2015.[242] Liver weight increased in a dose-dependent manner in maternal, fetal, and
postnatal mouse pups and was statistically significant at 1 mg/kg/day. NJ evaluators cited a
larger literature of evidence showing that increased liver weight can progress to more severe
hepatic toxicity and neoplastic lesions over longer duration exposures. NJ chose to model
maternal liver because both serum level and liver effects were measured at the same time point
(dose-response modelling between PFNA in maternal serum and liver weight in pups measured
later would be less certain). New Jersey evaluators derived a BMDL10% (lower 95th percentile



                                                 55
confidence limit on the benchmark dose) for a 10 percent increase in liver weight. This was
4.9 mg/L in maternal serum. An uncertainty factor of 1,000 was applied to the BMDL10% to derive
a target serum level in humans of 4.9 µg/L. This included an uncertainty factor of three for gaps
in the toxicological database (UFD) including lack of chronic or cancer studies and variability in
animal model response. In support of this factor, they cited two studies in rats, a 13-week sub-
chronic study and a two-generation study (18-21 weeks), that administered a commercial
mixture of PFNA. The commercial mixture was not pure PFNA; it contained 74 percent PFNA and
26 percent other PFAS with carbon lengths of C8-C13. The PFNA mixture produced liver and
kidney effects at lower administered daily doses compared to Das et al. 2015.[250, 251] Additional
uncertainty factors were ten for human variability (UFH), three for differences between mice and
humans (UFA), and ten to account for extrapolation of a chronic standard from a short-term (17-
day) study (UFS).

New Hampshire RfD
New Hampshire used the BMDL10 derived by NJ as their point of departure but applied a smaller
total uncertainty factor of 100 to derive a target serum of 49 µg/L.[77] Their uncertainty factors
included: a ten-fold factor for human variability, a three-fold factor for differences between mice
and humans, and a three-fold factor for database limitations. New Hampshire did not apply an
uncertainty factor for use of a short-term study to derive a chronic health protective value. They
considered hepatic hypertrophy to be the onset of adverse critical effects in the liver and were
comfortable that the mouse is a highly sensitive animal model for this response to PFAS. NHDES
acknowledged database uncertainties cited by NJ DWQI and added lack of immunotoxicity
testing results suitable for establishing a dose-response relationship. NHDES used a dosimetric
adjustment factor (DAF) to calculate an RfD (4.3 ng/kg-day) that would produce the target
serum at steady state. Their calculation used a serum half-life estimate of 4.3 years associated
with men and women >50 years old in Zhang et al. 2013. NHDES considered this estimate to be
better suited to a liver endpoint assumed to apply to the entire population.

Michigan Science Advisory Workgroup RfD
Michigan evaluators concurred with the point of departure and approach developed by
ATSDR.[268] The one exception was their use of a different serum half-life estimate for PFNA of
3.9 years. This value is the arithmetic mean for two groups 1) women of reproductive years and
2) men and women > 50 years old in a study by Zhang et al. 2013. Michigan selected a
developmental endpoint that is associated with maternal serum level of PFNA during pregnancy.
However, they reasoned that this approach would better represent the entire population.[268]

Discussion of uncertainties
The serum elimination half-life estimates used by the risk assessors above were derived from a
study of Chinese adults by Zhang et al. 2013 that estimated daily clearance of PFAS in paired
blood and urine samples.[25] This was a novel method and conducted in a general population



                                                 56
with low serum levels of PFNA (median 0.37 ug/L). In the Zhang et al. study population, younger
females (age ≤50 years), had significantly lower levels of serum PFNA than women>50 years old
or men. The estimated arithmetic mean elimination half-life for the young female group was 2.5
years (913 days) and for the combined male and older female group was 4.3 years (1,570 days).
Recently, Yu et al. 2021 published a three-year biomonitoring study in a New Jersey community
exposed to elevated PFNA in their drinking water..[26] The geometric mean of the study group
was five times higher than the mean PFNA levels in U.S. adults as measured in 2015-2016 by the
CDC. The study collected three blood samples one year apart in 99 participants from 2017 to
2020. Residents ranged in age between 20 – 74 years old and were 68 percent female. Half-life
estimates of PFNA in serum were 3.52 years for the 68 most highly exposed participants. Focus
on the more highly exposed members minimized bias from ongoing background exposure to
PFNA including at least one transient detection of 7-11 ppt PFNA in tap water at all 41 homes
tested.[26]

Emerging evidence in mice and rats shows that PFNA reduces serum and testicular testosterone
and injures male reproductive tissues and function. In Feng et al. 2009, serum testosterone levels
were increased at 1 mg/kg-day and sharply decreased at 5 mg/kg-day in Sprague Dawley adult
male rats dosed for 14 days. At ≥3 mg/kg-day, estradiol levels were increased and testicular cells
contained apoptotic features including crescent chromatin condensation and chromatin
margination.[270] A study by NTP reported an 81 percent drop in serum testosterone in adult
male rats dosed 2.5 mg/kg-day for 28 days (serum level measured at day 29 was 380 mg/L). In
the same experiment, testosterone levels were increased in females rats ≥ 1.56 mg/kg-day
(measured serum level at day 29 was 26.4 mg/L).[94] Three recently published studies in Parkes
mice by Singh and Singh reported that PFNA reduced serum testosterone levels, altered sperm
viability and sperm production, and produced degenerative changes in the seminiferous
tubules.[253, 254, 271] The LOAELs for these outcomes in mice were: 5 mg/kg-day in the gestation
exposure study (NOAEL: 2 mg/kg-day)[271]; 2 mg/kg-day in the 14-day prepubertal exposure
study (no NOAEL),[253] and 0.5 mg/kg-day in the 90 day study (NOAEL: 0.2 mg/kg-day).[254] In
addition, the male mice were tested for fertility at the end of the 90-day PFNA exposure by
mating them to unexposed female mice. No effect was seen on their ability to mate but reduced
numbers of pups per litter was observed in the litters sired by the 0.5 mg/kg-day dose group.
This was likely due to reduced sperm motility, viability, and sperm count observed in this
group.[254] Singh and Singh did not measure serum PFNA at any time points in their studies.
Without an indication of internal dose or more information about toxicokinetics of PFNA in this
strain of mice, the study results are not suitable for dose-response modelling. It does support
ATSDR’s use of a modifying factor for database limitations and use by others of an uncertainty
factor for database deficiencies.




                                                57
Immune toxicity of PFNA has been demonstrated at low doses (LOAELs were 1-3 mg/kg-day) in
several 14-day rodent studies. For example, Fang et al. 2008 reported decreased thymus and
spleen weights, impairment of cell cycle progression, decreases in specific types of innate
immune cells, and decreased interleukin-4 secretion in the spleen in male mice.[258] Studies by
the same authors in male rats showed decreased thymus and spleen weights, dose-dependent
levels of apoptosis in spleen, increased production of pro-inflammatory and decreased
production of anti-inflammatory cytokines in spleen..[259, 260]



Human Relevance
PFNA is structurally very similar to PFOA, a much better studied PFAS with both animal and
human data supporting the human relevance of development endpoints. See our discussion of
human relevance in Deriving the State Action Level for PFOA.

Reviews by ATSDR and New Jersey showed limited human studies, with both positive and null
associations, for increased serum cholesterol or other lipids (HDL, LDL, triglycerides) and higher
levels of serum liver enzymes (ALT, ALP, and GGT5).[4, 242] Positive associations between serum
PFNA level and higher serum ALT, ALP or GGT were also reported in several recent studies of
populations with background PFAS exposures in Sweden, China, and the U.S.[150, 262, 263]

In rodents, the liver and developmental effects produced by PFNA at low doses appear to be
largely (but not entirely) mediated by activation of PPARα. Wolf et al. 2010 dosed bred wild-type
(WT) and PPARα knockout (KO) female mice with five oral doses of PFNA ranging from 0.83 to 2
mg/kg/day on GD 1-18. In WT litters, PFNA increased pup liver weight at PND 21 at a dose of
0.83 mg/kg-day, reduced the number of live pups at birth and decreased survival at weaning at
the 1.1 mg/kg-day dose group, and reduced pup weight gain and delayed eye opening at the 2
mg/kg-day dose group. In KO litters, no developmental effects were observed and pup liver
weight was increased only at the highest dose.[255] This study underscores that the dose-
response curve could look very different in tissues that are less responsive to PPARα. Human
liver has lower expression of PPARα compared to mouse liver and is not as prone to proliferative
changes mediated by PPARα.[56, 144, 184] This does not rule out the relevance of the effect but it
introduces uncertainty in interpreting the dose-response relationship for liver outcomes in mice.

The evidence underlying this argument is specific to liver responses and does not extend to the
many other tissues in the human body that express PPARα and other PPARs that may be minor
targets of PFAS. PPARα and PPARγ are centrally involved in lipid and glucose regulation in a
number of other tissues and are widely expressed in immune cells, endocrine organs, and
reproductive tissue including the placenta.[272, 273] As such, a PPARα-mediated pathway of

5
 Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT) are liver
enzymes measured in serum that indicate liver injury.


                                                   58
developmental effects in rodents should be considered potentially relevant to human
reproduction and fetal and child development.

Some associations between PFNA exposure measures and reproductive and developmental
outcomes have been reported in epidemiological studies. Maternal serum PFNA early in
pregnancy was associated with higher risk of preterm birth in two prospective cohorts in
Denmark and Massachusetts.[98, 265] Maternal serum levels of PFNA were associated with
gestational diabetes in healthy, non-obese women with a family history of type 2 diabetes in
one study.[266] Other reports include associations in prospective studies between higher serum
PFNA and increased risk of miscarriage,[267] lower birth weights,[265] altered timing of puberty
onset for boys and girls,[167] and altered bone mineral density in girls at 17 years old.[174] In
addition, a cross-sectional study in the C8 health Project cohort found that PFNA in childhood
serum was associated with lower levels of sex hormones and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) in
boys and girls six to nine years old.[163]

Although there exists a growing body of evidence for male reproductive toxicity in rodents, it is
not known whether PFNA lowers testosterone levels or impairs male reproductive function in
humans. A few epidemiological studies have looked but not found associations between serum
level of PFNA and serum testosterone or impaired sperm parameters.[163, 274-277] These studies
were conducted in populations with no obvious source of elevated PFNA exposure with average
serum levels of PFNA reported to be 1.0-1.7 µg/L. Studies of more highly exposed populations
are needed.

Investigations of PFNA and immune endpoints in humans are also limited. Associations have
been reported between higher PFNA exposure and decreased antibody response to a
vaccine,[229, 231] higher number of reported respiratory infections or common cold in children,[229,
236]
       and asthma in children.[264] Asthma and allergic diseases were not associated with PFNA
exposure in a number of other studies.[229, 235, 236, 278]

Washington State Recommendation: 2.5 ng/kg-day
We selected the ATSDR MRL as the basis for our public health advice for PFNA in public drinking
water. We modified it slightly with the new half-life estimate of 3.52 years (1,285 days) from Yu
et al. 2021, as follows:


       MRL (mg/kg-day) = POD (mg/L) x DAF (L/Kg-day) ÷ UF
        Where the POD = 6.8 mg/L PFNA in serum
        Where the DAF = Vd x (Ln(2)/T1/2) = 0.2 L/kg x (Ln(2)/1,285 days) =1.08 x 10-4 L/kg –
           day.
        Where the UF = 300




                                                     59
    WA health protective value = 6.8 mg/L x 1.08 x 10-4 L/kg – day ÷ 300 = 2.45 x10-6 mg/kg-day
    (or 2.5 ng/kg-day)


The ATSDR MRL is based on sensitive developmental effects in mice considered relevant to
humans. The MRL derived from developmental effects was lower than candidate MRLs derived
from clearly adverse liver effects. Although liver weight is a sensitive target of PFNA activity in
rodents, human liver has lower expression of PPARα compared to mouse liver and is not as
prone to proliferative changes mediated by PPARα.[56, 144, 184] ATSDR did not consider this
endpoint suitable for dose-response extrapolation from mice to humans.

Compared to the earlier estimate from Zhang et al. 2013, we had higher confidence in the serum
half-life calculated from Yu et al. 2021. The latter study directly measured declining PFNA in
serum over three years in a community exposed through drinking water and whose serum levels
of PFNA were high enough to minimize bias from low background exposures. We used the
estimate in the highly exposed male and female participants from this study (3.52 years or 1,285
days) to further minimize this potential bias. Forty-two percent of these participants were
women between 20–55 years old, which supports our use of the estimate to model maternal
serum levels. The half-life estimate for younger women was not statistically different than the
estimate for older women and men.

We concurred with ATSDR’s ten-fold factor for database uncertainty (UFD). Data gaps for PFNA
include lack of chronic testing for immune, liver and cancer endpoints. There is emerging
evidence of male reproductive toxicity in rodents. PFNA is less studied but similar to PFOA in
both chemical structure and observed rodent toxicity. PFOA has a similar equivalent RfD based
on a more robust toxicological dataset including epidemiological studies that support the
relevance of adverse effects on growth and development for human populations.

Sensitive subpopulations: We expect the fetal period to have the highest sensitivity to
developmental effects. Infancy and childhood may also be sensitive windows for any PFNA-
mediated alterations in hormones and effects on pubertal development. Rodent data show that
pubertal development may be a sensitive window for PFNA.

Relative Source Contribution: 50 percent
RSCs were developed for children and adults (see Table 2) using the subtraction method and the
EPA Exposure Decision Tree described in EPA’s methodology.[58] The RSCs for PFNA were 50
percent for infants, children, and adults. The target serum level at the PFNA MRL is 22.7 µg/L.
The serum contribution from drinking water sources should not exceed 50 percent of that target
serum level or 11.4 µg/L.

An RSC of 50 percent is concordant with RSC determinations in three other states: NJ, NH and
Michigan. [76]


                                                 60
Water Ingestion Rate: MDH model
As discussed in the Introduction to Approach and Methods section, we used a Minnesota
Department of Health model with age-specific drinking water ingestion rates that includes
placental and lactational transfer to children from mothers with chronic exposure to PFAS in
community drinking water.[75] This approach was adopted by MI and NH in deriving their MCLs
for PFNA.

We assumed age-specific drinking water ingestion rates at the 90th percentile for chronic
periods of exposure (children >one years old and adulthood). We assumed 95th percentile
drinking water intake for lactating women and for formula-fed infants (assuming powdered
formula is mixed with tap water). Breastfed infants were assumed to be exclusively breastfed at
the upper-end intake rate for six months and then gradually tapered off breastmilk over the
following six months while other foods and drinks are introduced, including juices or infant
formula mixed with tap water.

The model outputs are provided below in Figure 7. A chronic drinking water level of 9 ng/L
PFNA was the maximum concentration that allowed serum levels of infants and children to
remain within the 50 percent RSC for drinking water sources. The peak serum level predicted for
breastfed infants as a result of 9 ng/L PFNA in community drinking water was 11.1 µg/L.
Formula-fed infants peaked at 3.6 µg/L PFNA in serum. Maternal serum level of PFNA attributed
to the drinking water source at the time of pregnancy was 3.1 µg/L. and the expected starting
serum for infants at birth 2.1 µg/L.




                                               61
Figure 7. Model predicted PFNA serum level (mg/L) in A) formula-fed and B) breastfed infants resulting only
from exposure to PFNA in community drinking water. For formula-fed infants, 95th percentile water intake
was assumed for the first year followed by 90th percentile water intake during the rest of childhood and
adulthood. For breastfed infants, exclusive breastfeeding was assumed for the first six months with gradual
tapering until one year of age. After one year, breast-fed infants are assumed to drink water at the 90th
percentile intake rate. The dotted lines represent the maximum allowable PFNA serum level from drinking
water only, as determined by the RSC for the age group. It represents the percentage allotted to drinking
water sources of the acceptable daily PFNA intake from all sources.




                                                    62
Deriving the State Action Level for PFHxS
PFHxS is structurally similar to PFOS, but has six
rather than eight fully fluorinated carbons. In water
it occurs as its anion perfluorohexane sulfonate
(shown here). PFHxS along with its salts and
commercial precursor compounds has been used
in certain class B firefighting foams; in waterproof           Perfluorohexane sulfonate
and stainproof coatings for carpet, apparel, leather, upholstery and other textiles; in cleaning
and polishing agents; as a mist suppressant in metal plating; and in electronics and
semiconductors manufacturing.[279] It was phased out of domestic production by its major U.S.
producer (3M) in 2002, but may still be produced globally.[279]

PFHxS and/or precursors have been released to the environment from manufacturing plants[280]
from commercial products such as aqueous film-forming foam used at military bases and
airports,[40] and may be released from products like carpet protection treatments.[281] PFHxS is
very persistent in the environment and can be detected in soils and groundwater years after
release.[282] Volatile precursors can be transported long distances by air.[283] PFHxS frequently
occurs with PFOS when detected in U.S. public drinking water samples.[244] In Washington state
drinking water, PFHxS has been found along with PFOS in several areas where firefighting foam
is the suspected source of PFAS contamination.[1]

PFHxS is one of four PFAS routinely measured in people. The general population is exposed to
PFHxS through diet, drinking water, use of certain consumer products, and inhalation of indoor
air and dust.[4] Drinking water can be a significant contributor to exposure[4, 19] In the 2015–2016
CDC NHANES survey, the mean serum level of PFHxS in a representative sample of the U.S.
population was 1.18 µg/L. Ninety-five percent of the population had serum levels below 4.9
µg/L.[68] PFHxS is poorly excreted from the human body. Mean serum half-life was 7.3 years in a
group of retired fluorochemical workers and 5.3 years in over 100 men and women followed
after PFHxS was removed from their drinking water.[17, 24]

The liver is the primary target of PFHxS toxicity in rodent studies. Effects observed include
increased liver weight, hepatocellular hypertrophy, altered lipid metabolism, steatosis, and
necrosis.[284-286] Several studies have reported thyroid cell damage and reduced T4 and T3
thyroid hormone levels in rodent studies.[284, 287, 288] Reproductive and developmental effects
have been reported in some studies, such as reduced litter size [286] and reduced birth weight,[287]
but have not been consistently observed. Altered spontaneous behavior and habituation was
observed in adult mice following PFHxS dosing on postnatal day ten[289] but similar results were
not observed in mice exposed as adults,[286] in rats exposed as adults[284] or in adult rats exposed
during gestational and pre-weaning periods.[290] A key data gap is the lack of immune toxicity
testing in animal studies.


                                                 63
       According to ATSDR’s 2021 assessment, the weight-of-evidence from epidemiological studies
       suggests associations between higher PFHxS exposure in humans and decreased antibody
       response to vaccines, increased serum liver enzymes (particularly alanine aminotransferase or
       ALT), and decreased serum bilirubin levels.[4]

       In addition, studies have reported associations between higher PFHxS exposure and increased
       risk of hyperactivity in children,[177, 179] reduced T4 levels in pregnant women and male infants,[213,
       291, 292]
                   increased serum lipids,[293] and lower birth weights.[160] These associations are
       inconsistently observed and have not been studied enough to reach conclusions.

       The carcinogenicity of PFHxS has not been investigated.

       Review of Health Protective Values
       DOH reviewed the available health protective values for daily chronic human intake of PFHxS.
       We focused on high-quality and comprehensive risk evaluations that considered recent scientific
       research and were conducted by U.S. federal and state agencies. These included a minimal risk
       level (MRL) derived by ATSDR, a reference dose (RfD) derived by the NHDES, an RfD derived by
       the MDH and a RfD developed by the MSWG. These are presented in Table 8 and discussed
       below.

                        Table 8. Health Protective Values for PFHxS Reviewed by Washington
                                                                     Human        Uncertainty
              Critical                                               Equivalent   factors       Oral RfD, MRL,      Exposure
Source        study          Critical effect                         dose         (UFs)a        Target serumb       duration
ATSDR         Butenhoff      NOAEL of 1 mg/kg-day for thyroid        0.0047       UFtotal 300   20 ng/kg-day        Intermediate
2021[4]       et al. 2009;   follicular cell hypertrophy and         mg/kg-dayc                 (MRL)               (2–52 wks.)
              Hoberman       hyperplasia in adult male rats                       UFH=10
              and York       treated for 42 days.                                 UFA=3
              2003[284]      LOAEL: 3 mg/kg-day                                   MF=10
                             TWA serum level for adult males at
                             the NOAEL: 73.22 mg/L.

NH            Chang et al.   BMDL for decreased litter size in                    UFtotal 300   46.3 µg/L (target   Chronic
2019          2018[286]      mice exposed from preconception                                    serum level)
[77]                         through gestation.                                   UFH=10
                             NOAEL: 0.3 mg/kg-day                                 UFA=3
                             LOAEL: 1.0 mg/kg-day                                 UFs=3 UFD=3   4.0 ng/kg-day
                             Maternal serum level at BMDL:                                      (RfD)d
                             13.9 mg/L

MDH           NTP            BMDL20% for reduced serum               0.00292e     UFtotal 300   9.7 ng/kg-day       Short-term
2019[74]      2019[247]      thyroxine (free T4) in adult male       mg/kg-day                  (RfD)               and chronic
                             rats in a 28-day oral toxicity study.                UFH=10
                             LOAEL: 0.625 mg/kg-day. No                           UFA=3
                             NOAEL.                                               UFD=10
                             Serum level at BMDL20% was 32.4
                             mg/L




                                                                     64
MSWG        NTP 2019       BMDL20% for reduced serum               0.00292e         UFtotal 300       9.7 ng/kg-day       Chronic
2019[268]                  thyroxine (free T4) in adult male       mg/kg-day                          (RfD)
                           rats in a 28-day oral toxicity study.                    UFH=10
                           LOAEL: 0.625 mg/kg-day. No                               UFA=3
                           NOAEL.                                                   UFD=10
                           Serum level at BMDL20% was 32.4
                           mg/L
a Uncertainty factors: UF = intra-species uncertainty factor; UF = inter-species uncertainty factor; UF = subchronic to chronic
                         H                                       A                                      S
uncertainty factor; UFL= LOAEL to NOAEL uncertainty factor; UFD= incomplete database uncertainty factor; UFtotal= total (multiplied)
uncertainty factor. MF=modifying factor. Uncertainty factors are generally applied as factors of 1 (no adjustment), 3 or 10, with 3 and
10 representing a 0.5 and 1.0 log-unit. Because individual UFs represent log-units, the product of two UFs of 3 is taken to be 10.
b RfD is Reference dose, MRL is minimal risk level, target serum level is analogous to an RfD but on a serum basis.

c The derivation of the human equivalent dose from the serum level at the NOAEL assumed a human serum half-life of 3,102 days (8.5

years) and a volume of distribution of 0.287 L/Kg for PFHxS.
d RfD = target serum x dosimetric adjustment factor = 46.3 ng/mL x 8.61 x10-2 mL/kg-day) = 4.0 ng/kg-day. The DAF assumed a

human serum half-life of 1716 days for women from Li et al. 2018 and a volume of distribution of 0.213 L/kg.
e The human equivalent dose was 32.4 mg/L x 0.000090 L/kg-day = 0.00292 mg/kg-day. The dosimetric adjustment factor assumed a

human serum half-life of 1,935 days (5.3 years) from Li et al. 2018 and a volume of distribution of 0.25 L/kg.


     ATSDR MRL
     ATSDR conducted an extensive review of the available epidemiological and toxicological data
     and based their minimal risk level on a reproductive and developmental rat study by Butenhoff
     et al., 2009. This study administered PFHxS by gavage at 0, 0.3, 1, 3, and 10 mg/kg-day to adult
     female rats for 14 days prior to pregnancy and through gestation to postnatal day (PND) 22.
     Adult males were treated 14 days prior to mating and for a minimum of 42 days. Offspring were
     not dosed directly but were exposed by placental transfer in utero and via nursing. The study
     reported no significant changes to the fertility index, the mating index, or estrous cycling. There
     were no signs of neurotoxicity or altered motor activity in the parental rats (F0) when assessed
     by the functional observational battery. In the adult F0 males, total serum cholesterol was
     reduced in all treatment groups. At 3 and 10 mg/kg-day, males had increased liver weight,
     centrilobular hepatocellular hypertrophy, and hypertrophy/hyperplasia of thyroid follicular
     cells.[284] Increased serum levels of alkaline phosphatase was also seen in males at 10 mg/kg-day.
     These liver and thyroid effects were not observed in the F0 females.[284] Thyroid hormones were
     not measured. Pups (F1) did not have lower birthweights or reduced growth at PND 22. Pups
     were not evaluated for developmental delays, thyroid gland weight, serum thyroid hormones, or
     for neurobehavioral outcomes.

     ATSDR considered the thyroid effects in F0 male rats adverse and relevant to humans. The
     absence of similar effects in F0 female rats was possibly related to their lower serum levels of
     PFHxS resulting from more rapid excretion of PFHxS compared to males. Thyroid follicular cell
     adenomas have been observed in rats with long-term oral exposures to the structurally similar
     compound PFOS.[121]

     The ATSDR MRL is based on the time-weighted average serum concentration (73.2 mg/L) in
     male rats at the NOAEL of 1 mg/kg-day. ATSDR derived an equivalent human dose by using a


                                                                 65
first-order single-compartment model. They divided the NOAELHED by a total uncertainty factor
of 300 (10x for human variability, 3x for extrapolation from animals to humans, plus a modifying
factor of 10x for database limitations). The primary database limitations noted were lack of
immunotoxicity testing and lack of longer duration studies for PFHxS.[4]

Since the ATSDR assessment was first derived in 2018, new high-quality studies on PFHxS have
become available and have served as the basis for later assessments by U.S. states.

NHDES RfD
New Hampshire selected reproductive toxicity in mice as the critical effect and Chang et al. 2018
as the critical study for their target serum and RfD. The Chang et al. 2018 study[286]
administered PFHxS to female mice for 14 days prior to pregnancy, through pregnancy, and
through lactation. Males were dosed for 42 days starting 14 days prior to mating. Pups were
observed until PND 36 for pubertal development benchmarks. The administered doses were 0,
0.3, 1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg-day. In the parent generation (F0), dose-dependent hepatocellular
hypertrophy was observed starting at the lowest dose tested (0.3 mg/kg-day), increased
absolute and relative liver weights in both male and female mice were statistically significant ≥
1.0 mg/kg-day, and liver necrosis, decreased serum cholesterol, decreased bilirubin and
increased alkaline phosphatase were observed in F0 males at 3 mg/kg-day.[286]

There was a slight but statistically significant decrease in the mean number of pups per litter at
1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg-day, which appeared to be related to a slight decrease in number of implant
sites rather than loss of implanted embryos. The fertility index for F0 males and females was not
significantly altered at any dose. There were no significant alterations in sperm motility, count,
density, or morphology in F0 males. In offspring (F1), there were no treatment-related effects on
postnatal survival or developmental delays noted. Anogenital distance in F1 males at PND 1 was
increased in all treated groups but did not show a dose-response relationship. Males and
females had increased relative liver weight at 3.0 mg/kg-day, and females had increased relative
thyroid weight at 3.0 mg/kg-day dose.

Serum TSH levels were measured at multiple time points and were not altered in F0 or F1 mice.
The study did not measure for other serum thyroid hormones T4 and T3. Neurobehavioral
testing conducted in the F0 generation was negative for dose-related effects. Mechanistically,
PFHxS was biologically active in mice on the same receptors activated by other PFAS as
evidenced by mRNA transcripts associated with PPARα activation, CAR activation, PXR
activation, and fatty acid metabolism.[286]

The study authors considered all differences observed between treated groups and controls,
except liver effects, to be equivocal or of unclear significance. The internal doses in females at
the time of mating (study day 14) were 27, 89, and 179 mg/L at 0.3, 1.0, and 3.0 mg/kg-day,
respectively.[286]



                                                 66
New Hampshire risk assessors selected the slight decrease in mean litter size at ≥ 1.0 mg/kg-day
in Chang et al. 2018 as the critical effect. At the LOAEL, maternal serum at the end of the
experiment was 89 mg/L. New Hampshire used a benchmark dose method to derive a BMDL of
13.9 mg/L in serum in female mice from the Chang et al. data. They applied a total uncertainty
factor of 300 (10 for human variability, 3 for uncertainties between rodents and humans, 3 for
extrapolation from a subacute study to a chronic standard, and 3 for database uncertainties).
Database limitations included a lack of multigenerational rodent studies and a lack of immune
toxicity testing. The resulting target serum in humans was 46.3 µg/L and the RfD was 4.0 ng/kg-
day. They noted that a lack of similar findings in rats in Butenhoff et al, 2009, may be due to
faster excretion and lower serum levels of PFHxS in the female rats.

MDH RfD and MSWG RfD
MDH selected reductions in thyroid hormones as their critical effect and a 2019 study by the
National Toxicology Program (described below) as their critical study. Similar results from
Ramhøj et al. 2018 (described below) were considered supporting evidence. Supporting
evidence also included thyroid cell damage observed in male rats (Butenhoff et al. 2009) and
increased relative thyroid weight in developmentally exposed female mice (Chang et al. 2018).

The National Toxicology Program (NTP) 2019 conducted a 28-day oral gavage study in adult
male and female Harlan Sprague Dawley rats. The study measured growth and gross behavior,
serum hormone levels, and evaluated all organs for gross and histopathological findings at the
end of 28 days. Serum measurements of PFHxS were collected for assessment of internal dose at
the end of the experiment.[247]

There was a dose-dependent decrease in serum thyroid hormone levels in both sexes with more
marked reductions in T3, fT4 and tT4 in males. Reductions were statistically significant in males
at the lowest dose tested (LOAEL: 0.625 mg/kg-day; mean serum level of PFHxS was 66.8 mg/L).
In males, thyroid hormone effects appeared to plateau above the 2.5 mg/kg-day dose (serum
level of 129 mg/L). Males at this dose level had 36 percent reductions in mean serum T3,
65 percent reductions in serum tT4, and 79 percent reductions in fT4. In females, the declines
were more gradual. TSH was only slightly increased and did not reach statistical significance in
either males or females. In males, increased liver weights and reduced cholesterol was evident at
the 1.25 mg/kg-day dose group (mean serum level 92.1 mg/L) and hepatocyte hypertrophy was
significant in the 2.5 mg/kg-day dose group (129 mg/L in serum). Internal doses in male rats
were much higher than in females reflecting the faster excretion of PFHxS by female rats.[247]

Ramhøj et al. 2018 conducted complimentary reproductive toxicity assays with oral
administration of PFHxS in pregnant Wistar rats and collected endocrine measurements in dams
and pups. No effect on litter size or post-implantation loss was observed at doses up to 45
mg/kg-day PFHxS. Serum total T4 was markedly reduced in a dose-dependent manner in
pregnant and lactating dams and in pups at doses ≥ 5 mg/kg-day. At the LOAEL of 5 mg/kg-


                                                67
day, maternal serum total T4 was reduced 18 percent compared to controls after only seven
days of exposure (at GD 15) and reduced 26 percent after the lactation period (PND 22). Pups at
the LOAEL had 31 percent reductions in serum T4 at PND 16. Thyroid hormone changes at the
LOAEL were noted in the absence of altered maternal body weight or increased maternal liver
weight and only equivocal changes in these two measures in pups. Histological examination of
liver tissue was not performed. The NOAEL was 0.05 mg/kg day. Maternal serum level of PFHxS
was not measured. This study suggests that reduction of T4 is a sensitive effect in both pregnant
rats and their offspring.[287]

The MDH conducted benchmark dose modeling of the total and free T4 data in males and
females in the NTP study. BMDL20% for 20 percent reduction in T4 in males was similar for total
T4 (33.6 mg/L) and free T4 (32.4 mg/L). MDH applied a dosimetric adjustment to the BMDL20 for
fT4 to calculate a human equivalent dose. MDH applied an uncertainty factor of 300 (10 for
uncertainty factor for human variability, 3 for interspecies differences, and 10 for database
uncertainty). Noted database deficiencies were lack of immunotoxicity testing and lack of a two-
generation developmental study. Their final RfD is 9.7 ng/kg-day (corresponding target serum
level = 108 µg/L).[74]

Michigan evaluators concurred with Minnesota’s derivation of RfD and adopted it as the basis
for their MCL in drinking water for PFHxS.

Discussion of Uncertainties
The reduction in litter size observed in mice by Chang et al. was not observed in two studies in
rats. The absence of reproductive toxicity in Butenhoff et al. 2009 and Ramhøj et al. 2018 could
possibly be explained by lower serum levels in the rat studies. Female rats have been shown to
have a much shorter serum elimination half-life for PFHxS (~2 hours) compared to serum half-
lives of one month in male rats and male and female mice.[294] A second study that replicates this
finding in mice would increase confidence in this effect.

It is not clear whether PFHxS-mediated reductions in circulating thyroid hormone levels
adversely affect brain development, cognitive function or behavior in rodents. In a follow-up
study by Ramhøj et al. 2020, the thyroid hormone disruptions observed in Ramhøj et al. 2018
were not correlated with significant changes to motor activity or deficits in learning and memory
in offspring as adults.[290] Similarly, they were not associated with changes in cortical gene
expression in the brains of offspring.[290] We agree with Ramhøj et al. 2020 however that
significant reduction in T4 alone should warrant concern and that the metrics currently applied
in rodent models my not be sufficiently sensitive to detect adverse neurodevelopmental effect
of PFHxS-induced maternal and perinatal hypothyroxinemia.




                                                 68
Human Relevance
In rats, PFHxS lowered serum thyroid hormones T3 and T4 and fT4 without a compensatory rise
in TSH. In humans, low serum fT4 with normal levels of TSH is known clinically as
hypothyroxinemia and is of special concern when it occurs in pregnant women. Thyroid
hormones are critical to normal fetal growth and brain development and even subclinical
maternal hypothyroxinemia early in pregnancy may adversely affect neurodevelopment and
cognitive function in children (e.g., delayed psychomotor development, delayed language
development, and lower IQ).[295-301] In the first trimester of pregnancy, thyroid hormone is
supplied from the mother to the fetus via the placenta. In the second trimester, although the
fetus begins to synthesize thyroid hormone, it still obtains thyroid hormone mainly from the
mother.[295]

Ballesteros 2017[213] conducted a systematic review of ten epidemiological studies in populations
of pregnant women, infants, and older children that investigated levels of thyroid hormones in
relation to PFAS exposure. Five of these studies measured PFHxS. Associations between
maternal serum PFHxS and maternal free T4 and total T4 were generally inverse but not
statistically significant.[213] Boesen et al., 2020,[302] reviewed fifteen more recent studies of
maternal and infant thyroid hormone levels in relation to maternal PFAS exposure and reported
that “overall, most studies supported a positive association of maternal TSH and a possible
negative association of maternal T4 and T3 upon PFAS exposure.” For PFHxS specifically, the
associations between maternal exposure and maternal TSH were positive in seven of eight
studies; but only two were statistically significant. No clear trend was evident between PFHxS
and T3 or T4.[302]

In the general adult population, two large studies in NHANES populations found no association
between PFHxS serum levels and TSH, free or total T4 or T3.[114, 303] Another study in the NHANES
population found that higher serum PFHxS was associated with increased rates of subclinical
hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism in women but not in men.[113] A meta-analysis of six studies
in the general population by Kim et al. 2018 showed that serum PFHxS correlated with slightly
lower serum total T4 but not with fT4, T3, or TSH.[212] A recent cohort study by Andersson et al.
2019, observed no difference in incidence of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism between a
highly exposed community of Ronneby, Sweden and a reference community. This study
evaluated hospital diagnosis records and prescriptions for thyroid medications in the two
areas.[304]

Overall, there is limited evidence for PFHxS-associated thyroid hormone level perturbations in
human populations. Inconsistency may be due to the age and gender of the population studied
or the co-occurrence of other PFAS in serum that appear to be biologically active on these
measures.[212] Two small studies by Webster et al. also showed that a marker of thyroid
autoimmune disease (TPaO) and iodine insufficiency influenced the strength of the associations



                                                   69
for other PFAS-mediated reductions in T4. These conditions are known stressors for thyroid
hormones and may impair the ability of the body to compensate for reductions in T4.[214, 216]

Evidence for neurobehavioral effects is mixed in human observational studies. Positive
associations between serum level of PFHxS in children (12–15 years old) and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) were reported in a large cohort (n=10,546) of children in the C8
Health Project and in a smaller group (n=571) in the NHANES population.[177, 179] In the C8 study,
having a doctor diagnosis of ADHD was positively associated with PFHxS serum levels in all
quartiles compared to the lowest quartile. The association remained, but was slightly weaker
when restricted to those who currently used medication to treat the condition.[179] Several
studies have looked for and not found associations between prenatal PFHxS exposure (maternal
serum) and ADHD or autism in school-aged children.[305-307]

Washington State Recommendation: 9.7 ng/kg-day
We concurred with the MDH RfD of 9.7 ng/kg-day based on thyroxinemia in adult male rats in
the NTP study. This is supported by observations of hypertrophy/hyperplasia of thyroid follicular
cells in Butenhoff et al. 2009 and reduced T4 in pregnant rats and their offspring in Ramhøi et al.
2018. The slight reduction in litter size observed in mice by Chang et al. was not observed in two
studies in rats and has not been replicated in mice.

We support MDH’s application of a ten-fold uncertainty factor for database limitations. In
addition to the lack of immunotoxicity testing, there is a lack of testing for developmental
neurobehavioral effects in mice exposed during gestation and nursing. A study by Viberg et al.
2013, reported altered spontaneous behavior and habituation behavior in mature laboratory
mice after a single dose of PFHxS at postnatal day ten. The LOAEL and NOAEL for this study
were 9.2 mg/kg and 6.1 mg/kg.[289]

Sensitive populations. Maternal thyroid insufficiency during pregnancy can affect the
neurodevelopment of children. Women of childbearing age and developing fetuses are sensitive
subgroups for this outcome. It is not clear whether lower T4 in infants confers a risk to
development, but we made a protective assumption to include the infant as a sensitive
subgroup. PFHxS is found in breast milk, indicating a potential for lactational exposure.
Papadopoulou et al. 2016, found that serum levels of PFHxS (and other PFAS) increased in
breastfeeding infants by 3–5 percent per month.[308]
Relative Source Contribution: 50 percent
RSCs were developed for children and adults (see Table 2) with the subtraction method and the
EPA Exposure Decision Tree. The RSCs for PFHxS were 50 percent for infants, children, and
women of childbearing age. The reference serum at the RfD is 108 µg/L. At 50 percent RSC, the
contribution from drinking water should not exceed 54 µg/L in the serum (108 µg/L x 0.50).

Minnesota, New Hampshire, and Michigan also derived an RSC of 50 percent for PFHxS.



                                                70
Water Intake Rate: MDH model
As discussed in the Introduction to Approach and Methods, we used a Minnesota Department
of Health model with age-specific drinking water rates, which includes placental and lactational
exposure routes when estimating exposure from PFHxS in community drinking water.[73]

We assumed age-specific water intake rates at the 90th percentile for chronic periods of
exposure (children>1 year old through adulthood). We assumed 95th percentile drinking water
intake for lactating women and formula-fed infants (assuming powdered formula is mixed with
tap water). We assumed breastfed infants were exclusively breastfed for six months and then
gradually tapered off breastmilk over the following six months with other foods and drinks
introduced, including juices or infant formula mixed with tap water.

We provide the model outputs below (Figure 8). A chronic drinking water level of 65 ng/L PFHxS
was the maximum concentration that allowed serum levels of infants and children to remain
within the 50 percent RSC for drinking water sources. The peak serum level predicted as a result
of 65 ng/L in drinking water was 52.6 µg/L in breastfed children and 26.5 µg/L in formula fed
children. The maternal serum level of PFHxS attributed to drinking water at the time of
pregnancy was 26.9 µg/L, and the expected starting serum for infants at birth was 18.8 µg/L.




                                               71
Figure 8. Model predicted PFHxS serum level (mg/L) in A) formula-fed and B) breastfed infants resulting
only from exposure to PFHxS in community drinking water. For formula-fed infants, 95th percentile water
intake was assumed for the first year, followed by 90th percentile water intake during the rest of childhood
and adulthood. For breastfed infants, exclusive breastfeeding was assumed for the first six months, with
gradual tapering until one year of age. After one-year, breastfed infants are assumed to drink water at the
90th percentile intake rate. The dotted lines represent the maximum allowable PFHxS serum level from
drinking water only, as determined by the RSC for the age group. It represents the percentage allotted to
drinking water sources of the acceptable daily PFHxS intake from all sources



                                                      72
Deriving the State Action Level for PFBS                                   Perfluorobutane Sulfonate
Perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS) has four fully fluorinated
carbons and a sulfonic acid group on one end. In drinking water
PFBS occurs as its anion perfluorobutane sulfonate (shown here).
PFBS is a surfactant and a potential degradation product of PFBS-
based chemicals. PFBS-based compounds are used primarily as
water and stain repellents for leather, textiles and carpets.[309] They
are also used to seal porous hard surfaces like concrete, granite and tile grout.[309] They are used
in the manufacture of paints, waxes, and electronics and in some fume suppressant products
used by chrome plating operations.[42, 310] PFBS is associated with older firefighting foams made
by 3M but not with newer fluorotelomer formulations.[311] PFBS has been detected in foods, food
contact papers, indoor dust, and drinking water.[42]

PFBS has been detected in limited sampling of drinking water in Washington State.[1] It is the
fourth most frequently detected PFAS in testing of drinking water sources near California fire-
training areas and municipal landfills.[312] PFBS is cleared from human serum much more rapidly
than PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA. The average half-life of PFBS in human serum was
estimated to be 27 days and 44 days in two small occupational studies.[28, 313] PFBS is
infrequently detected in human serum or urine in the general U.S. population (aged 12 years
and older).[12, 68] Communities with PFBS in their drinking water have higher reported frequencies
of detection,[9, 10] including over 80 percent of adults in one study.[28] PFBS serum concentrations
measured in people without occupational exposure are generally less than 2 µg/L when
detected. Much higher serum levels (92—921 µg/L) have been measured in fluoropolymer
manufacturing workers.[313]

PFBS and its potassium salt have been studied for toxicity in mice, rats, and monkeys. The
evidence includes a two-generation study of reproduction and development in rats,[314] three
gestational exposure studies in mice and rats,[315-317] 90-day oral studies in rats[318] and mice,[285]
and 28-day oral studies in rats.[247, 319] Adverse effects observed include reduced thyroid
hormones, kidney toxicity such as hyperplasia, developmental toxicity including delayed growth
and maturation, hypertrophy in liver tissue, increased serum liver enzymes, and altered lipid and
hematological profiles. Data gaps include lack of immune toxicity studies, chronic toxicity
studies and cancer testing in laboratory animals.[42] EPA conducted a structured review of studies
that investigated adverse effects of PFBS. This included 19 epidemiological studies that met EPA
criteria for data quality. PFBS levels in serum were positively associated in at least one study with
the following outcomes: adiposity in girls but not boys, asthma, serum cholesterol,
cardiovascular disease and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Evidence from these human
studies was considered equivocal by EPA evaluators.[42]




                                                  73
        Review of Health Protective Values
        DOH reviewed the available health protective values for daily ongoing human oral intake of
        PFBS. We focused on high-quality and comprehensive risk evaluations that considered recent
        scientific research and were conducted by U.S. federal and state agencies. Specifically, we
        evaluated reference doses by EPA, MDH, and MSWG and an acceptable daily dose by CA
        OEHHA. These are presented in Table 9 below. None of the risk assessments found sufficient
        information to evaluate PFBS for cancer outcomes.

                               Table 9. Health Protective Values for PFBS Reviewed by WA
                                                                   Human
                                                                   Equivalent    Uncertainty   Oral RfD or
              Critical           Point of Departure and            dose          factors       ADDb          Exposure
Source        study              Critical effect                   (mg/kg-day)   (UF)a         (mg/kg-day)   duration
EPA 2021      Feng et al         BMDL0.5 SD (22.1 mg/kg-day) for   0.095c        UFtotal 100   0.001         Subchronic
[42]          2017[315]          reduction of thyroid hormone                    UFH=10        RfD
                                 (total T4) in newborn female      (=22.1 x      UFA=3
                                 offspring of mice dosed during    0.0043 DAF)   UFD =3d
                                 pregnancy (GD 1-20)
                                 BMDL0.5 SD (22.1 mg/kg-day) for                 UFtotal 300   0.0003        Chronic
                                                                   0.095c
                                 reduction of thyroid hormone                    UFH=10        RfD
EPA 2021      Feng et al
                                 (total T4) in newborn female                    UFA=3
              2017                                                 (=22.1 x
                                 offspring of mice dosed during                  UFD=10e
                                                                   0.0043 DAF)
                                 pregnancy (GD 1-20).
CA OEHHA      Feng et al         BMDL1SD (22.1 mg/kg-day) for      0.06f         UFtotal 100   0.0006        Chronic
2021 [312]    2017               reduction of thyroid hormone                    UFH=10        ADD
                                 (total T4) in pregnant female     (=22.1/345    UFA=3
                                 mice on gestation day 20. Mice    DAF)          UFD=3g
                                 were dosed during pregnancy
                                 (GD 1-20).
MSWG          Feng et al         BMDL20 (28.19 mg/kg-day) for      0.0892        UFtotal 300   0.0003        Chronic
2019[268]     2017               20% reduction of thyroid                        UFH=10        RfD
                                                                   (=28.19/316
                                 hormones (total T4) in newborn                  UFA=3
                                 female offspring of mice dosed    DAF)h
                                                                                 UFD=10i
                                 during pregnancy (GD 1-20)
MDH           Feng et al.        NOAEL (50 mg/kg-day) for          0.158         UFtotal 100   0.0016        Short-term
2017[320]     2017               altered maternal thyroid                        UFH=10        RfD           (1-30 days)
                                 hormones, reduced pup growth      (=50/317      UFA= 3
                                 and developmental delays in       DAF)h         UFD= 3k
                                 female mice dosed (GD 1-20).
                                 LOAEL: 200 mg/kg-day
MDH           Leider et al       BMDL10 (45 mg/kg-day) for 10%     0.129         UFtotal 100   0.0013        Subchronic
2017[320]     2009a; York        increase in mild hyperplasia in                 UFH=10        RfD           (>30 days –
              et al.             kidney in female rats in a 10     (=45/350      UFA= 3                      10%
              2003[314, 317]     week, 2-generation rat study.     DAF)j         UFD= 3k                     lifetime)

MDH 2017      Leider et al       BMDL10 (45 mg/kg-day) for 10%     0.129         UFtotal 300   0.00043       Chronic
              2009a; York        increase in mild hyperplasia in                 UFH=10        RfD           (>10%
              et al. 2003                                                        UFA=3                       lifetime)



                                                                   74
                                  kidney in female rats in a 10-       (=45/350           UFD=3k
                                  week, 2-generation rat study.        DAF)j              UFs =3

a Uncertainty factors: UF
                          H= intra-species uncertainty factor; UFA= inter-species uncertainty factor; UFS= subchronic to chronic
uncertainty factor; UFL= LOAEL to NOAEL uncertainty factor; UFD= incomplete database uncertainty factor; UFtotal= total (multiplied)
uncertainty factor. Uncertainty factors are generally applied as factors of 1 (no adjustment), 3 or 10, with 3 and 10 representing a 0.5
and 1.0 log-unit. Because individual UFs represent log-units, the product of two UFs of 3 is taken to be 10. UFs that are not listed in this
table were equal to 1.
b RfD is a reference dose. ADD is acceptable daily dose.

c Prior to BMD modelling, animal doses from Feng et al 2017 were converted to HEDs by applying a dosimetric adjustment factor (DAF),

where HED = dose × DAF. EPA DAF for this POD= average serum half-life in female mice/average half-life in humans = 4.5 hours
(from Lau et al 2020)/ 1050 hours (from Xu et al 2020) = 0.0043. To compare EPA to the other DAFs in the table, we must express the
EPA as 1/DAF = 233.
d Database deficiencies included lack of developmental neurotoxicity studies, lack of testing for immunotoxicity and mammary gland

development.
e Database deficiencies for chronic exposure also included lack of long-term toxicity studies and uncertainty about hazard identification

and dose-response assessment for PFBS following chronic exposures.
f DAF is derived from average serum clearance in mouse from Lau et al. (2020) divided by mean human clearance from Olsen et al.

(2009). 1344 mL/kg-d (mouse)÷3.90 mL/kg-day (human)= 345.
g Database deficiencies identified by OEHHA included lack of studies for specific endpoints developmental neurotoxicity, immunotoxicity

and carcinogenicity and uncertainty about whether longer exposure duration would have exacerbated the critical effect on thyroid or
resulted in other effects at lower doses.
h The DAF derived by MDH is the ratio of human serum half -life/female mouse serum half-life = 665 hours /2.1 hours = 316.6. The

half- life in humans comes from Olsen et al 2009. The half-life in mice comes from Rumpler et al. 2016 and personal communication
with Lau, C 2017. Michigan used this same DAF but rounded down to 316.
i Database uncertainty based on lack of developmental neurotoxicity study.
j MDH applied a DAF based on serum half-life of PFBS in humans (665 hours) and female Sprague-Dawley rats (1.9 hours) to derive an

HED. DAF = 665 hours/1.9 hours = 350.
k Database uncertainty factor of 3 was applied for lack of neurodevelopmental, immunological and chronic studies.




         EPA, Michigan, California and Minnesota recommended chronic health protective values in the
         range of 0.3 – 0.6 µg/kg-day for PFBS. Evaluators generally concurred that reduction in thyroid
         hormones was the most sensitive adverse effect of PFBS exposure in animal studies. The three
         most recent assessments based their chronic health protective value on reductions in thyroid
         hormones observed in mice in the same critical study (Feng et al. 2017). They also cited a 28-day
         rat toxicity study by the National Toxicology Program (2019) as providing support for selection
         of the thyroid hormone reductions as a critical effect. MDH’s short-term RfD was based on Feng
         et al. 2017, but their subchronic and chronic oral RfDs were based on kidney toxicity observed in
         a developmental rat study (Leider et al 2009; York 2003) (see Table 9).

         We describe the critical studies of these assessments below.

         Feng et al. 2017 administered oral doses (50, 200, and 500 mg/kg-day) of potassium
         perfluorobutane sulfonate (K-PFBS) daily to pregnant mice on gestation days 1-20 and allowed
         offspring to nurse. Female offspring were monitored at birth (postnatal day 1), puberty
         (postnatal day 30), and adulthood (postnatal day 60) for growth, developmental benchmarks,
         and hormone levels. Male offspring were used for another study and were not evaluated. At the



                                                                      75
LOAEL (200 mg/kg-day), K-PFBS altered thyroid hormones in the dams and the offspring into
adulthood. Specifically dams at gestation day 20 had 21 percent lower total thyroxine (T4), 17
percent lower triiodothyronine (T3) and 21 percent higher thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) at
the LOAEL. Female offspring exposed to PFBS in utero had reductions up to ~30 percent in T3,
and reductions of up to 42 percent in T4 across the three time points evaluated. TSH was
elevated in offspring at puberty and adulthood, but was only statistically significant at puberty.
The NOAEL for altered thyroid hormones was 50 mg/kg-day.

A number of other adverse effects had the same LOAEL (200 mg/kg-day) in the Feng et al. study.
Pups were underweight compared to controls into adulthood and had delayed eye opening,
delayed vaginal opening, and delayed first estrous. At adulthood, ovaries were smaller with
reduced follicle development and there was reduced thickness of uterine lining indicating
reduced development of both organs. Abnormal estrous cycling (prolongation of diestrus) was
observed between puberty and adulthood. Serum estradiol was lower and luteinizing hormone
was higher at puberty compared to controls. Serum progesterone was decreased in adulthood.
The NOAEL was 50 mg/kg-d for all adverse effects noted. Maternal serum PFBS was measured
twelve hours after the last dose on gestation day 20 but given the very short half-life of PFBS in
female mice, EPA used the administered dose rather than the serum measurement to derive
their point of departure for risk assessment.[42, 315]

The National Toxicology Program, 2019 conducted a 28-day oral gavage study with PFBS in
adult male and female rats. Thyroid hormone levels (free T4, total T4, and T3) were reduced in
both male and female rats while TSH levels were highly variable and not statistically different
from controls at any dose. The magnitude of declines observed in T4 and T3 was more dramatic
than declines observed in mice in the Feng et al study. At the lowest dose tested in the NTP
study (62.6 mg/kg-day), free T4, and total T4 were at least 50 percent lower than controls in
females, and 70 percent lower than controls in males. Reductions in T3 were approximately 30
percent lower than controls in both male and female rats. No changes in thyroid histopathology
or weight were reported. A dose-dependent prolongation of diestrus at and above doses of 250
mg/kg-day was observed in female rats with marginal significance at the lowest dose tested
(125 mg/kg-day). The NTP study also reported increased kidney weights in males and increased
liver weights in females. The lowest dose administered (62.6 mg/kg-day) was the LOAEL for
significant reductions in T4 and T3 hormone levels.[247]

Lieder et al. 2009 and York et al. 2003 conducted a two-generation reproductive study in rats
with 0, 30, 100, 300, and 1000 mg/kg-day of K-PFBS administered by gavage to males and
females for 10 weeks prior to and through mating. Females continued to be dosed daily through
gestation and lactation. The first generation of offspring (F1) nursed until PND 22 and then
dosed from weaning through mating, gestation and a lactation period. The second generation
of offspring (F2) was not dosed directly but were allowed to nurse and sacrificed at three weeks.


                                                   76
The most sensitive effect observed was increased kidney hyperplasia and focal papillary edema
in males and females of the parent generation and F1 adults. MDH derived a BMDL10 for this
outcome of 45 mg/kg-day. Thyroid hormones T3 and T4 were not measured.[314, 317]

EPA RfD
EPA evaluators noted that similar patterns of reduced T3, total T4, and free T4 levels were
observed in the Feng et al. and NTP studies in pregnant mice, their offspring, and in adult male
and female rats exposed to PFBS. EPA also recognized that thyroid hormones are essential for
proper growth and development across species and that reductions in T3 and T4 observed
following gestational exposure in the Feng et al. study plausibly explained altered development
observed in female offspring.[42] EPA derived their PFBS RfD by first applying a dosimetric
adjustment factor (DAF) to the administered doses in Feng et al. to estimate human equivalent
doses. The EPA DAF was a ratio of average serum half-life in female mice (from Lau et al.
2020)[321] over the average serum half-life in humans (from Xu et al. 2020).[28]

                                                 4.5 ℎ𝑟𝑠
                                 𝐸𝑃𝐴′ 𝑠 𝐷𝐴𝐹 =            = 0.0043
                                                1050 ℎ𝑟𝑠
Both studies supporting EPA’s DAF are recently published. Lau et al. 2020 evaluated the
pharmacokinetics of oral PFBS dosing in CD-1 male and female mice at eight weeks of age. Xu
et al. 2020 monitored PFAS in the serum of a group of airport workers for five months. This
monitoring began two weeks after PFAS contamination was removed from their workplace
drinking water supply. The mean PFBS serum half-life for the group was 44 days and ranged
from 21 to 87 days in individual participants.[28]

EPA conducted benchmark dose (BMD) modelling on the human equivalent doses from the
Feng et al study. The point of departure was a T4 reduction of one half the standard deviation
(BMDL0.5 SD) compared to controls in newborn pups. EPA applied a 100-fold uncertainty factor
for subchronic exposures and a 300-fold uncertainty factor for chronic duration exposure.
Uncertainty factors (UF) included ten for human variability and three for interspecies uncertainty.
For subchronic exposures EPA applied a UF of three for database deficiencies, noting the lack of
developmental neurotoxicity studies and the lack of immune toxicity studies. For chronic
duration exposures, EPA applied a UF of ten for database deficiencies citing an additional
concern that long-term exposure studies in animals are lacking.

CA OEHHA ADD, MSWG and MDH RfDs
Michigan and California assessments differed from EPA in three areas: dose-response
modelling, dosimetric adjustment factors, and uncertainty factors (see Table 7). California
modelled a BMDL1.0 SD on the thyroid hormone (T4) reduction in pregnant female mice rather
than in their day-old pups. Michigan Science Advisory workgroup relied on earlier EPA
modelling of a BMDL20 for 20 percent reduction of thyroid hormones (total T4) in newborn
female offspring of mice. For dosimetric adjustment factors, Michigan relied on Rumpler et al.


                                                     77
2016, which reported a shorter serum half-life (2.1 hours) in mice.[322] California and Michigan
evaluators also relied on an earlier study for human serum half-life, by Olsen et al. 2009. This
earlier study monitored a small group of manufacturing workers (five men, one woman) during a
six-month break in PFBS production. The mean serum elimination half-life for PFBS in these
workers was 27.7 days and ranged 13–46 days for the six individuals.[27] Minnesota evaluators
selected a different critical effect from a longer duration study for the basis of its chronic RfD.
This kidney endpoint appears to be less sensitive than the BMDLs for altered thyroid hormone
level used as points of departure in the other assessments. EPA, Michigan and Minnesota
evaluators applied a 300-fold UF for their chronic health protective value. California evaluators
applied a 100-fold UF that differed only in selecting a 3-fold rather than a 10-fold UF for
database deficiency. California cited the same elements of concern regarding database
uncertainties.

We concurred with the 2021 EPA assessment. The EPA DAF relied on Lau et al. 2020 appears to
be the final peer-reviewed published study reported in the conference abstract by Rumpler et al.
2016. The half-life study in humans by Xu et al. 2020 had several advantages over the study in
six workers by Olsen et al. 2009. The newer study followed more workers (n=17), included more
females (n=6), and was more representative of an environmental drinking water exposure. We
also agreed that a database uncertainty factor of 10 was justified given the lack of chronic
toxicity testing and key data gaps. Lack of developmental neurobehavioral testing is a concern
given the thyroid effects observed. Preliminary studies provide some indication that PFBS may
act similarly to PFOS on immunoregulation.[323, 324]

Relevance to Humans
EPA conducted a structured review of the evidence for PFBS and thyroid effects. EPA concluded
that the evidence in animals for thyroid effects supports a hazard and that the thyroid is a
potential target for PFBS toxicity in humans. EPA also concluded that the animal evidence for
developmental toxicity supports a hazard.[42]

Several lines of supporting evidence were cited by EPA. Consistent reduced T4 and T3 were
observed across two species of rodents (mice and rats), adult and early life stages, and different
exposure durations (20–90 days). Maternal and neonatal thyroid hormone insufficiency were
considered coherent with pronounced and persistent developmental effects in female mouse
pups as they grew into adulthood. Altered estrous cycling in mature female pups was deemed
biologically consistent with these effects and was also observed in rats exposed as adults.

Although direct human evidence was lacking or deemed equivocal, EPA reviewed the
considerable evidence that supports the importance of T4 and thyroid hormone sufficiency for
proper human development. “Thyroid hormones play a critical role in coordinating complex
developmental processes for various organs/systems (e.g., reproductive and nervous system),




                                                  78
and disruption of thyroid hormone production/levels in a pregnant woman or neonate can have
persistent adverse health effects for the developing offspring.”[42]

Other PFAS with similar chemical structures to PFBS have been investigated for their potential
impact on thyroid hormone levels in pregnant women and their offspring. Some but not all of
these studies report associations between PFAS serum levels and thyroid hormone
perturbations.[213, 302]

EPA also evaluated the available evidence for other adverse effects of PFBS. Their synthesis of
rodent and human data on other outcomes concluded that PFBS animal evidence supports a
hazard for kidney toxicity and was “equivocal” for reproductive toxicity, hepatic effects, and
effects on lipid or lipoprotein homeostasis. Two other endpoints, immune effects and
cardiovascular effects, had equivocal evidence in human studies and no studies in laboratory
animals.[42]

Washington State recommendation: 300 ng/kg- day (EPA RfD)
We recommend using the chronic toxicity value in the April 2021 EPA assessment of PFBS. The
EPA toxicological assessment is comprehensive, high quality and incorporates the most recent
data available for PFBS. We concurred with EPA and others on thyroid hormone reduction as the
most sensitive critical effect and with selection of Feng et al, 2017 as the critical study. Results
from this study are supported by the 2019 NTP study that showed male and female rats exposed
to PFBS for 28 days as adults also had significantly reduced thyroid hormones at the lowest dose
tested.

Sensitive populations. Pregnant women, fetuses and infants are potentially susceptible life stages
for the types of effects observed in animal testing with PFBS. PFBS caused developmental
toxicity and persistent changes in thyroid hormone levels in gestationally exposed mice. In
humans, maternal thyroid hormones are critical for normal fetal growth and neurodevelopment
especially before the fetal thyroid gland has developed. Following birth, neonatal thyroid
function also supports infant growth and neurodevelopment.[36, 227, 325] Thyroid tissue stores of T4
are low in newborn children making them less able than adults to compensate for reductions in
T4.[326] Thyroid hormones are also important to maternal health and maintaining pregnancy.[327]

Relative source contribution (RSC): 20 percent
PFBS-based chemistries are still used in manufacturing and in commercial and consumer
products.[309] PFBS-based surfactants and polymers may degrade to PFBS as the products age or
undergo environmental degradation.[309] PFBS has been detected widely in surface waters and
aquatic and terrestrial biota including in remote areas.[309] Field studies show that PFBS has
potential for uptake into plants and livestock,[328-332] but PFBS detections in dietary samples were
infrequent in European and U.S. food surveys.[333, 334] A Swedish study, which measured PFBS in
serum samples collected between 1996 and 2010 from lactating women, showed that market


                                                  79
shifts in PFAS use aligned with trends in serum concentration. While long-chain PFAS showed
declining trends, the trend for PFBS showed a doubling of serum level every six years over this
time period.[335]

Although infant exposure to PFBS through breastmilk is possible, we did not find sufficient
information to model this pathway of exposure for infants. PFBS was detected in less than half
the studies identified by the MDH that evaluated breastmilk for its presence.[320] Cord blood
PFBS did not correlate well with paired maternal serum in a study by Wang et al. 2019.[336] For
other PFAS SALs, we were able to justify a 50 percent RSC for infants by accounting for their
breastmilk exposure when PFAS occurred in maternal tap water.

Overall, ongoing exposure to PFBS from non-drinking water sources is likely, but we found
insufficient data to quantify exposure from all sources other than tap water. Using the EPA
Exposure Decision Tree (Figure 4), we derived a default RSC of 0.2 for all life stages for PFBS (see
Table 2).

Drinking water intake rate: 0.174 L/kg-day (Infants)
We used assumptions consistent with our other PFAS SALs for upper-bound drinking water
intake rates for sensitive populations and life stages. Specifically, we considered 90th percentile
water intake rates for women of reproductive age and 95th percentile water intake rates for
pregnant and lactating persons and infants (birth to <1 year old) to protect the developing
child. These are shown in Table 10. The SAL calculated for infants adequately protects the other
sensitive groups and is selected to protect the population as a whole. Michigan MSWG and
California OEHHA also used infant drinking water intake rates to derive their state regulations
for PFBS in drinking water based on this same endpoint. The EPA assessment did not calculate
drinking water advice.
          Table 10: PFBS SAL calculations for four potentially sensitive populations/life stages
                                               Drinking water      Relative Source
                                 RfDa            Intake rate       contribution or   Candidate SALs
      Sensitive population    (mg/kg-day)       (L/kg-day)b            RSC (%)          (mg/L)
    Infants (<1 year)           0.0003          0.174 (95th)              20           0.000345
    Pregnant women               0.0003          0.038 (95th)            20             0.001579
                                                          th
    Lactating women              0.0003          0.047 (95 )             20             0.001277
    Women of reproductive
                                 0.0003          0.035 (90th)            20             0.001714
    age (15-44 y/o)
RfD = chronic oral Reference Dose for PFBS (EPA 2021).
a

Intake rates from 2019 EPA Exposure Factors Handbook Chapter 3 (based on consumers only population
b

and two-day average consumption).




                                                   80
Derivation of the PFBS SAL

                  𝑅𝑓𝐷
SAL =                              𝑥 𝑅𝑆𝐶
        𝐷𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑊𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒


                𝑚𝑔
        0.0003
             𝑘𝑔 − 𝑑𝑎𝑦
SAL =                 𝑥 0.20 = 0.000345 𝑚𝑔/𝐿
                𝐿
      0.174
            𝑘𝑔 − 𝑑𝑎𝑦


SAL = 345 ng/L (parts per trillion)




                                           81
References
1.    Washington Departments of Ecology and Health, Draft Chemical Action Plan for Per- and
      Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS). WA Department of Ecology. March 2021.
      apps.ecology.wa.gov/publications/summarypages/2004035.
2.    Hu, X.C., et al., Detection of Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) in U.S. Drinking Water
      Linked to Industrial Sites, Military Fire Training Areas, and Wastewater Treatment Plants.
      Environmental Science & Technology Letters, 2016. 3(10): p. 344-350.
3.    Interstate Technology Regulatory Council (ITRC). Environmental Fate and Transport for Per- and
      Polyfluoroalkyl Substances. 2020; Available from: pfas-1.itrcweb.org/wp-
      content/uploads/2020/10/f_and_t_508_2020Aug.
4.    Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), Toxicological Profile for
      Perfluoroalkyls. 2021, US Department of Health and Human Services.
      atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp200.
5.    Perez, F., et al., Accumulation of perfluoroalkyl substances in human tissues. Environ Int, 2013.
      59: p. 354-62.
6.    Koskela, A., et al., Perfluoroalkyl substances in human bone: concentrations in bones and effects
      on bone cell differentiation. Sci Rep, 2017. 7(1): p. 6841.
7.    Mamsen, L.S., et al., Concentrations of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in human embryonic
      and fetal organs from first, second, and third trimester pregnancies. Environ Int, 2019. 124: p.
      482-492.
8.    Nyberg, E., et al., Inter-individual, inter-city, and temporal trends of per- and polyfluoroalkyl
      substances in human milk from Swedish mothers between 1972 and 2016. Environ Sci Process
      Impacts, 2018. 20(8): p. 1136-1147.
9.    Holzer, J., et al., Biomonitoring of perfluorinated compounds in children and adults exposed to
      perfluorooctanoate-contaminated drinking water. Environ Health Perspect, 2008. 116(5): p. 651-
      7.
10.   Gyllenhammar, I., et al., Influence of contaminated drinking water on perfluoroalkyl acid levels in
      human serum--A case study from Uppsala, Sweden. Environ Res, 2015. 140: p. 673-83.
11.   Gyllenhammar, I., et al., Perfluoroalkyl Acids (PFAAs) in Serum from 2–4-Month-Old Infants:
      Influence of Maternal Serum Concentration, Gestational Age, Breast-Feeding, and Contaminated
      Drinking Water. Environmental Science & Technology, 2018. 52(12): p. 7101-7110.
12.   Calafat, A.M., et al., Legacy and alternative per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the U.S.
      general population: Paired serum-urine data from the 2013-2014 National Health and Nutrition
      Examination Survey. Environ Int, 2019. 131: p. 105048.
13.   Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention, Fourth National Report of Human Exposure to
      Environmental Chemicals, Updated Tables, Volume One, NHANES 1999-2010. 2021, U.S.
      Department of Health and Human Services.
14.   Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention, Fourth National Report on Human Exposure
      to Environmental Chemicals, Updated Tables, Volume Two, NHANES 2011-2016. 2021, U.S.
      Department of Health and Human Services.
15.   Interstate Technology Regulatory Council (ITRC). History and Use of Per- and Polyfluoroalkl
      Substances (PFAS). Available from: pfas-1.itrcweb.org/wp-
      content/uploads/2020/10/history_and_use_508_2020Aug_Final.
16.   Frisbee, S.J., et al., The C8 health project: design, methods, and participants. Environ Health
      Perspect, 2009. 117(12): p. 1873-82.




                                                  82
17.   Li, Y., et al., Half-lives of PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA after end of exposure to contaminated drinking
      water. Occup Environ Med, 2018. 75(1): p. 46-51.
18.   Graber, J.M., et al., Per and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) blood levels after contamination of
      a community water supply and comparison with 2013-2014 NHANES. J Expo Sci Environ
      Epidemiol, 2019. 29(2): p. 172-182.
19.   Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). PFAS Exposure Assessment
      Community Level Results Spokane County (WA) near Fairchild Air Force Base. 2020; Available
      from: atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/docs/factsheet/CDC_ATSDR-PFAS-EA-Spokane-County-Community-
      Level-Results-Fact-Sheet-H.
20.   Egeghy, P.P. and M. Lorber, An assessment of the exposure of Americans to perfluorooctane
      sulfonate: a comparison of estimated intake with values inferred from NHANES data. J Expo Sci
      Environ Epidemiol, 2011. 21(2): p. 150-68.
21.   Vestergren, R. and I.T. Cousins, Human dietary exposure to per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances
      (PFASs), in Persistent Organic Pollutants and Toxic Metals in Foods, M. Rose and A. Fernandes,
      Editors. 2013, Woodhead Publishing. p. 279-307.
22.   Poothong, S., et al., Multiple pathways of human exposure to poly- and perfluoroalkyl
      substances (PFASs): From external exposure to human blood. Environ Int, 2020. 134: p. 105244.
23.   Shoeib, M., et al., Indoor sources of poly- and perfluorinated compounds (PFCS) in Vancouver,
      Canada: implications for human exposure. Environ Sci Technol, 2011. 45(19): p. 7999-8005.
24.   Olsen, G.W., et al., Half-life of serum elimination of perfluorooctanesulfonate,
      perfluorohexanesulfonate, and perfluorooctanoate in retired fluorochemical production workers.
      Environ Health Perspect, 2007. 115(9): p. 1298-305.
25.   Zhang, Y., et al., Biomonitoring of perfluoroalkyl acids in human urine and estimates of biological
      half-life. Environ Sci Technol, 2013. 47(18): p. 10619-27.
26.   Yu, C.H., et al., Biomonitoring: A tool to assess PFNA body burdens and evaluate the
      effectiveness of drinking water intervention for communities in New Jersey. Int J Hyg Environ
      Health, 2021. 235: p. 113757.
27.   Olsen, G., et al., A comparison of the pharmacokinetics of perfluorobutanesulfonate (PFBS) in
      rats, monkeys and humans. Toxicology, 2009. 256: p. 65 - 74.
28.   Xu, Y., et al., Serum Half-Lives for Short- and Long-Chain Perfluoroalkyl Acids after Ceasing
      Exposure from Drinking Water Contaminated by Firefighting Foam. Environ Health Perspect,
      2020. 128(7): p. 77004.
29.   Bartell, S.M., Online Serum PFOA Calculator for Adults. Environmental Health Perspectives, 2017.
      125(10): p. 104502.
30.   EPA, Update for Chapter 3 of the Exposure Factors Handbook: Ingestion of water and other
      select liquids. 2019. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development,
      Washington D.C.
31.   Winkens, K., R. Vestergren, U. Berger, I Cousins,, Early life exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl
      substances (PFASs): A critical review. Emerging Contaminants, 2017. 3(2): p. 55-68.
32.   Verner, M.A., et al., A Simple Pharmacokinetic Model of Prenatal and Postnatal Exposure to
      Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs). Environ Sci Technol, 2016. 50(2): p. 978-86.
33.   Goeden, H.M., C.W. Greene, and J.A. Jacobus, A transgenerational toxicokinetic model and its
      use in derivation of Minnesota PFOA water guidance. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol, 2019. 29(2):
      p. 183-195.
34.   Mondal, D., et al., Relationships of perfluorooctanoate and perfluorooctane sulfonate serum
      concentrations between mother-child pairs in a population with perfluorooctanoate exposure
      from drinking water. Environ Health Perspect, 2012. 120(5): p. 752-7.



                                                  83
35.   DeWitt, J.C., S.J. Blossom, and L.A. Schaider, Exposure to per-fluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl
      substances leads to immunotoxicity: epidemiological and toxicological evidence. J Expo Sci
      Environ Epidemiol, 2019. 29(2): p. 148-156.
36.   Miller, M.D., et al., Thyroid-disrupting chemicals: interpreting upstream biomarkers of adverse
      outcomes. Environ Health Perspect, 2009. 117(7): p. 1033-41.
37.   Kim, H.Y., et al., The Relationship Between Perfluoroalkyl Substances Concentrations and Thyroid
      Function in Early Childhood: A Prospective Cohort Study. Thyroid, 2020. 30(11): p. 1556-1565.
38.   IARC, Some Chemicals Used as Solvents and in Polymer Manufacture, in IARC Monographs on the
      Identification of Carcinogenic Hazards to Humans. Volume 110. 2017, International Agency for
      Research on Cancer (IARC): Lyon, France.
39.   Shearer, J.J., et al., Serum concentrations of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and risk of renal
      cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst, 2020. 113(5): p. 580-587.
40.   Barzen-Hanson, K.A., et al., Discovery of 40 Classes of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in
      Historical Aqueous Film-Forming Foams (AFFFs) and AFFF-Impacted Groundwater. Environ Sci
      Technol, 2017. 51(4): p. 2047-2057.
41.   EPA, Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) Action Plan. 2019, U.S. Environmental
      Protection Agency: Washington D.C.
42.   EPA, Human Health Toxicity Values for Perfluorobutane Sulfonic Acid (CASRN 375-73-5) and
      Related Compound Potassium Perfluorobutane Sulfonate (CASRN 29420-49-3). 2021, U.S.
      Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development: Washington D.C.,.
43.   Interstate Technology Regulatory Council (ITRC). Regulations, Guidance, and Advisories for Per-
      and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS); Tables 4 and 5. 2021; Available from: pfas-
      1.itrcweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/ITRCPFASWaterandSoilValuesTables_MAR-2021-
      final.
44.   EPA. Drinking Water Treatability Database. 2019; Available from: epa.gov/water-
      research/drinking-water-treatability-database-tdb.
45.   Interstate Technology Regulatory Council (ITRC). Treatment Technologies and Methods for Per-
      and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS). 2020; Available from: pfas-1.itrcweb.org/wp-
      content/uploads/2020/10/treatment_tech_508_Aug-2020-Final.
46.   Patlewicz, G., et al., A Chemical Category-Based Prioritization Approach for Selecting 75 Per- and
      Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) for Tiered Toxicity and Toxicokinetic Testing. Environ Health
      Perspect, 2019. 127(1): p. 14501.
47.   EPA, Drinking Water Health Advisory for Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA). 2016, Environmental
      Protection Agency: Washington, D.C. p. 103.
48.   New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, Health-Based Maximum Contaminant Level Support
      Document: Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS). New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute
      Health Effects Subcommittee. 2018.
49.   New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, Health-based Maximum Contaminant Level Support
      Document: Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA), New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute Health
      Effects Subcommittee, 2016. p. 475.
50.   Bartell, S.M. and V.M. Vieira, Critical review on PFOA, kidney cancer, and testicular cancer. J Air
      Waste Manag Assoc, 2021. 71(6): p. 663-679.
51.   Center for Human Health and the Environment. GenX Exposure Study PFAS blood sample results,
      Wilmington NC November 13, 2018. 2018; Available from:
      chhe.research.ncsu.edu/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Community-event-BLOOD-
      slides.
52.   Dhingra, R., et al., A Study of Reverse Causation: Examining the Associations of Perfluorooctanoic
      Acid Serum Levels with Two Outcomes. Environ Health Perspect, 2017. 125(3): p. 416-421.


                                                  84
53.   Watkins, D.J., et al., Exposure to perfluoroalkyl acids and markers of kidney function among
      children and adolescents living near a chemical plant. Environ Health Perspect, 2013. 121(5): p.
      625-30.
54.   Shin, H.M., et al., Retrospective exposure estimation and predicted versus observed serum
      perfluorooctanoic acid concentrations for participants in the C8 Health Project. Environ Health
      Perspect, 2011. 119(12): p. 1760-5.
55.   Kudo, N., Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, in Toxicological Effects of Perfluoroalkyl and
      Polyfluoroalkyl Substances, J.C. DeWitt, Editor. 2015, Springer International Publishing:
      Switzerland. p. 151-175.
56.   Corton, J.C., J.M. Peters, and J.E. Klaunig, The PPARalpha-dependent rodent liver tumor response
      is not relevant to humans: addressing misconceptions. Arch Toxicol, 2018. 92(1): p. 83-119.
57.   Wambaugh, J., Dosimetric Anchoring of Toxicological Studies, in Toxicological Effects of
      Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances, J.C. DeWitt, Editor. 2015, Springer International
      Publishing: Switzerland. p. 337-361.
58.   EPA, Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human
      Health (2000), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, 2000.
59.   Haug, L.S., et al., Characterisation of human exposure pathways to perfluorinated compounds--
      comparing exposure estimates with biomarkers of exposure. Environ Int, 2011. 37(4): p. 687-93.
60.   Christensen, K.Y., et al., Perfluoroalkyl substances and fish consumption. Environ Res, 2017. 154:
      p. 145-151.
61.   Gebbink, W.A., et al., Perfluoroalkyl acids and their precursors in Swedish food: The relative
      importance of direct and indirect dietary exposure. Environ Pollut, 2015. 198: p. 108-15.
62.   Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention, Fourth National Report on Human Exposure
      to Environmental Chemicals, Updated Tables, January 2019, Volume One. 2019, U.S. Department
      of Health and Human Services.
63.   Michigan PFAS Action Response Team (MPART). PFAS Response: Taking Action, Protecting
      Michigan Phase 1 (2018) results. 2019 [cited 2019 July]; Available from:
      michigan.gov/pfasresponse/0,9038,7-365-88059---,00.
64.   LeBlanc, B., State Study: PFAS found in 179 Michigan water supplies, but only 2 exceed fed
      threshold, in The Detroit News. August 16, 2019.
65.   Olsen, G.W., et al., Serum concentrations of perfluorooctanesulfonate and other fluorochemicals
      in an elderly population from Seattle, Washington. Chemosphere, 2004. 54(11): p. 1599-611.
66.   Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention, Fourth National Report on Human Exposure
      to Environmental Chemicals - Updated Tables, January 2017. US Department of Health and
      Human Services.
67.   Olsen, G.W., et al., Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in American Red Cross adult blood
      donors, 2000–2015. Environmental Research, 2017. 157: p. 87-95.
68.   Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention, Fourth Report on Human Exposure to
      Environmental Chemicals, Updated Tables, January 2019. U.S. Department of Health and Human
      Services.
69.   Fromme, H., et al., Pre- and postnatal exposure to perfluorinated compounds (PFCs). Environ Sci
      Technol, 2010. 44(18): p. 7123-9.
70.   Mogensen, U.B., et al., Breastfeeding as an Exposure Pathway for Perfluorinated Alkylates.
      Environ Sci Technol, 2015. 49(17): p. 10466-73.
71.   Loccisano, A.E., et al., Development of PBPK models for PFOA and PFOS for human pregnancy
      and lactation life stages. J Toxicol Environ Health A, 2013. 76(1): p. 25-57.
72.   Kingsley, S.L., et al., Variability and predictors of serum perfluoroalkyl substance concentrations
      during pregnancy and early childhood. Environ Res, 2018. 165: p. 247-257.


                                                  85
73.   Minnesota Department of Health (MDH), Toxicological Summary for Perfluorooctane sulfonate.
      2019, Environmental Health Division Health Risk Assessment Unit, Minnesota Department of
      Health.
74.   Minnesota Department of Health (MDH), Toxicological Summary for Perfluorohexane Sulfonate.
      2019, Environmental Health Division, Health Risk Assessment Unit, Minnesota Department of
      Health.
75.   Minnesota Department of Health (MDH), Toxicological Summary for Perfluorooctanoic Acid
      (PFOA). 2017, Environmental Health Division, Health Risk Assessment Unit, Minnesota
      Department of Health.
76.   Michigan Department of Health and Human Services Division of Environmental Health, Public
      health drinking water screening levels for PFAS. 2019, Michigan PFAS Action Response Team
      (MPART) Human Health Workgroup:
      michigan.gov/documents/pfasresponse/MDHHS_Public_Health_Drinking_Water_Screening_Lev
      els_for_PFAS_651683_7.
77.   New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, Technical Background Report for the
      June 2019 Proposed Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) and Ambient Groundwater Quality
      Standards (AGQSs) for Perfluorooctane sulfonic Acid (PFOS), Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA),
      Perfluorononanoic Acid (PFNA), and Perfluorohexane sulfonic Acid (PFHxS). 2019:
      des.nh.gov/sites/g/files/ehbemt341/files/documents/r-wd-19-29.
78.   New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, Maximum Contaminant Level Recommendation for
      Perfluorooctanoic Acid in Drinking Water - Basis and Background, 2017.
79.   Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR 721, Long-Chain Perfluoroalkyl Carboxylate and
      Perfluoroalkyl Sulfonate Chemical Substances; Significant New Use Rule: Federal Register July
      27,2020 p. 45109-45126.
80.   Han, X., et al., Renal elimination of perfluorocarboxylates (PFCAs). Chem Res Toxicol, 2012.
      25(1): p. 35-46.
81.   EPA, Health Effects Support Document for Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA), 2016, U.S.
      Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water; Washington D.C.
82.   Perkins, R., et al., 13-week dietary toxicity study of ammonium perfluorooctanoate (APFO) in
      male rats. Drug Chem Toxicol, 2004. 27: p. 361 - 378.
83.   Loveless, S.E., et al., Evaluation of the immune system in rats and mice administered linear
      ammonium perfluorooctanoate. Toxicol Sci, 2008. 105(1): p. 86-96.
84.   Butenhoff, J., et al., The reproductive toxicology of ammonium perfluorooctanoate (APFO) in the
      rat. Toxicology, 2004. 196: p. 95 - 116.
85.   Biegel, L., et al., Mechanisms of extrahepatic tumour induction by peroxisome proliferators in
      male CD rats. Toxicol Sci, 2001. 60: p. 44 - 55.
86.   DeWitt, J., et al., Perfluorooctanoic acid-induced immunomodulation in adult C57BL/6J or
      C57BL/6N female mice. Environ Health Perspect, 2008. 116: p. 644 - 650.
87.   Yang, Q., Y. Xie, and J. Depierre, Effects of peroxisome proliferators on the thymus and spleen of
      mice. Clin Exp Immunol, 2000. 122: p. 219 - 226.
88.   Yang, Q., et al., Further evidence for the involvement of inhibition of cell proliferation and
      development in thymic and splenic atrophy induced by the peroxisome proliferator
      perfluoroctanoic acid in mice. Biochem Pharmacol, 2001. 62(8): p. 1133-40.
89.   Lau, C., et al., Effects of perfluorooctanoic acid exposure during pregnancy in the mouse. Toxicol
      Sci, 2006. 90(2): p. 510-8.
90.   Abbott, B.D., Developmental Toxicity, in Toxicological Effects of Perfluoroalkyl and
      Polyfluoroalkyl Substances. 2015, Springer International Publishing: Switzerland. p. 203-218.



                                                 86
91.    Wolf, C., et al., Developmental toxicity of per-fluorooctanoic acid in the CD-1 mouse after cross-
       foster and restricted gestational exposures. Toxicol Sci, 2007. 95: p. 462 - 473.
92.    Macon, M.B., et al., Prenatal perfluorooctanoic acid exposure in CD-1 mice: low-dose
       developmental effects and internal dosimetry. Toxicol Sci, 2011. 122(1): p. 134-45.
93.    White, S.S., et al., Gestational and chronic low-dose PFOA exposures and mammary gland
       growth and differentiation in three generations of CD-1 mice. Environ Health Perspect, 2011.
       119(8): p. 1070-6.
94.    National Toxicology Program, NTP Technical Report on the Toxicity Studies of Perfluoroalkyl
       Carboxylates (Perfluorohexanoic Acid, Perfluorooctanoic Acid, Perfluorononanoic Acid, and
       Perfluorodecanoic Acid) Administered by Gavage to Sprague Dawley Rats 2019, U.S. Department
       of Health and Human Services: Research Triangle Park, NC.
95.    Lau, C., Perfluorinated Compounds: An Overview, in Toxicological Effects of Perfluoroalkyl and
       Polyfluoroalkyl Substances, J.C. DeWitt, Editor. 2015, Springer International Publishing:
       Switzerland. p. 1-21.
96.    New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, Health Based Maximum Contaminant Level Support
       Document: PFOA. (Appendix A). 2017, New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute Health Effects
       Subcommittee February 15, 2017.
97.    Johnson, P.I., et al., The Navigation Guide - evidence-based medicine meets environmental
       health: systematic review of human evidence for PFOA effects on fetal growth. Environ Health
       Perspect, 2014. 122(10): p. 1028-39.
98.    Meng, Q., et al., Prenatal Exposure to Perfluoroalkyl Substances and Birth Outcomes; An
       Updated Analysis from the Danish National Birth Cohort. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2018.
       15(9).
99.    National Toxicology Program (NTP), Systematic Review of Immunotoxicity Associated with
       Exposure to Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) or Perfluoroctane Sulfonate (PFOS). 2016, National
       Toxicology Program, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
100.   Abraham, K., et al., Internal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) and biological
       markers in 101 healthy 1-year-old children: associations between levels of perfluorooctanoic acid
       (PFOA) and vaccine response. Arch Toxicol, 2020. 94(6): p. 2131-2147.
101.   Olsen, G., et al., Half-life of serum elimination of perfluorooctanesulfonate,
       perfluorohexanesulfonate, and perfluorooctanoate in retired fluorochemical production workers.
       Environ Health Perspect, 2007. 115: p. 1298 - 1305.
102.   Sakr, C.J., et al., Cross-sectional study of lipids and liver enzymes related to a serum biomarker of
       exposure (ammonium perfluorooctanoate or APFO) as part of a general health survey in a cohort
       of occupationally exposed workers. J Occup Environ Med, 2007. 49(10): p. 1086-96.
103.   Gallo, V., et al., Serum perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS)
       concentrations and liver function biomarkers in a population with elevated PFOA exposure.
       Environ Health Perspect, 2012. 120(5): p. 655-60.
104.   Lin, C.Y., et al., Investigation of the associations between low-dose serum perfluorinated
       chemicals and liver enzymes in US adults. Am J Gastroenterol, 2010. 105(6): p. 1354-63.
105.   Yamaguchi, M., et al., Consumption of seafood, serum liver enzymes, and blood levels of PFOS
       and PFOA in the Japanese population. J Occup Health, 2013. 55(3): p. 184-94.
106.   Lopez-Espinosa, M.J., et al., Association of Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) and Perfluorooctane
       Sulfonate (PFOS) with age of puberty among children living near a chemical plant. Environ Sci
       Technol, 2011. 45(19): p. 8160-6.
107.   Di Nisio A, S.I., Valente U, Tescari S, Rocca MS, Guidolin D, Dall'Acqua S, Acquasaliente L, Pozzi N,
       Plebani M, Garolla A, Foresta C., Endocrine disruption of androgenic activity by perfluoroalkyl



                                                   87
       substances: clinical and experimental evidence. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 2019. 104(4): p. 1259-
       1271.
108.   Steenland, K., et al., Association of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate
       (PFOS) with uric acid among adults with elevated community exposure to PFOA. Environ Health
       Perspect, 2010. 118: p. 229 - 233.
109.   Geiger, S.D., J. Xiao, and A. Shankar, Positive association between perfluoroalkyl chemicals and
       hyperuricemia in children. Am J Epidemiol, 2013. 177(11): p. 1255-62.
110.   Shankar, A., J. Xiao, and A. Ducatman, Perfluoroalkyl chemicals and elevated serum uric acid in
       US adults. Clin Epidemiol, 2011. 3: p. 251-8.
111.   Olsen, G.W., et al., Epidemiologic assessment of worker serum perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS)
       and perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) concentrations and medical surveillance examinations. J Occup
       Environ Med, 2003. 45(3): p. 260-70.
112.   Knox, S.S., et al., Perfluorocarbon exposure, gender and thyroid function in the C8 Health Project.
       J Toxicol Sci, 2011. 36(4): p. 403-10.
113.   Wen, L.L., et al., Association between serum perfluorinated chemicals and thyroid function in
       U.S. adults: the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2007-2010. J Clin Endocrinol
       Metab, 2013. 98(9): p. E1456-64.
114.   Jain, R.B., Association between thyroid profile and perfluoroalkyl acids: data from NHANES 2007-
       2008. Environ Res, 2013. 126: p. 51-9.
115.   Savitz, D.A., et al., Relationship of perfluorooctanoic acid exposure to pregnancy outcome based
       on birth records in the mid-Ohio Valley. Environ Health Perspect, 2012. 120(8): p. 1201-7.
116.   Savitz, D.A., et al., Perfluorooctanoic acid exposure and pregnancy outcome in a highly exposed
       community. Epidemiology, 2012. 23(3): p. 386-92.
117.   Stein, C., D. Savitz, and M. Dougan, Serum levels of perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane
       sulfonate and pregnancy outcome. Am J Epidemiol, 2009. 170: p. 837 - 846.
118.   Steenland, K., et al., Ulcerative colitis and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in a highly exposed
       population of community residents and workers in the mid-Ohio valley. Environ Health Perspect,
       2013. 121(8): p. 900-5.
119.   Steenland, K., L. Zhao, and A. Winquist, A cohort incidence study of workers exposed to
       perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). Occup Environ Med, 2015. 72(5): p. 373-80.
120.   Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Drinking Water Health Advisory for Perfluorooctanoic
       Acid (PFOA). 2016, Envrionmental Protection Agency: Washington, D.C. p. 103.
121.   Butenhoff, J.L., et al., Chronic dietary toxicity and carcinogenicity study with ammonium
       perfluorooctanoate in Sprague-Dawley rats. Toxicology, 2012. 298(1-3): p. 1-13.
122.   Biegel, L.B., et al., Mechanisms of extrahepatic tumor induction by peroxisome proliferators in
       male CD rats. Toxicol Sci, 2001. 60(1): p. 44-55.
123.   National Toxicology Program, NTP Technical Report on the Toxicology and Carcinogenesis
       Studies of Perfluorooctanoic Acid (CAS No. 335-67-1) Administered in Feed to Sprague Dawley
       Rats. Technical Report 598. May 2020. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Research
       Triangle Park, North Carolina.
124.   Barry, V., A. Winquist, and K. Steenland, Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposures and incident
       cancers among adults living near a chemical plant. Environ Health Perspect, 2013. 121(11-12): p.
       1313-8.
125.   Vieira, V.M., et al., Perfluorooctanoic acid exposure and cancer outcomes in a contaminated
       community: a geographic analysis. Environ Health Perspect, 2013. 121(3): p. 318-23.
126.   Steenland, K., et al., Review: Evolution of evidence on PFOA and health following the
       assessments of the C8 Science Panel. Environ Int, 2020. 145: p. 106125.



                                                   88
127.   Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E.C., et al., Breast cancer risk after exposure to perfluorinated compounds in
       Danish women: a case-control study nested in the Danish National Birth Cohort. Cancer Causes
       Control, 2014. 25(11): p. 1439-48.
128.   Eriksen, K.T., et al., Perfluorooctanoate and perfluorooctanesulfonate plasma levels and risk of
       cancer in the general Danish population. J Natl Cancer Inst, 2009. 101(8): p. 605-9.
129.   Hardell, E., et al., Case-control study on perfluorinated alkyl acids (PFAAs) and the risk of
       prostate cancer. Environ Int, 2014. 63: p. 35-9.
130.   Innes, K.E., et al., Inverse association of colorectal cancer prevalence to serum levels of
       perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) in a large Appalachian
       population. BMC Cancer, 2014. 14: p. 45.
131.   New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, Summary Report on the New Hampshire
       Department of Environmental Services Development of Maximum Contaminant Levels and
       Ambient Ground Water Quality Standards for PFOS, PFOA, PFNA and PFHxS. 2019, New
       Hampshire Department of Environmental Services: Concord, NH.
132.   CA OEHHA, Notification Level Recommendations, Perfluorooctanoic Acid and Perfluorooctane
       Sulfonate in Drinking Water 2019, California Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
       Environmental Health Hazard Assessment: oehha.ca.gov/water/notification-level/notification-
       level-recommendations-perfluorooctanoic-acid-pfoa.
133.   Butenhoff, J.L., et al., The reproductive toxicology of ammonium perfluorooctanoate (APFO) in
       the rat. Toxicology, 2004. 196(1-2): p. 95-116.
134.   Koskela, A., et al., Effects of developmental exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) on long
       bone morphology and bone cell differentiation. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol, 2016. 301: p. 14-21.
135.   Onishchenko, N., et al., Prenatal exposure to PFOS or PFOA alters motor function in mice in a
       sex-related manner. Neurotox Res, 2011. 19(3): p. 452-61.
136.   Bartell, S.M., et al., Rate of decline in serum PFOA concentrations after granular activated
       carbon filtration at two public water systems in Ohio and West Virginia. Environ Health Perspect,
       2010. 118(2): p. 222-8.
137.   Loveless, S., et al., Comparative responses of rats and mice exposed to linear/branched, linear, or
       branched ammonium perfluorooctanoate (APFO). Toxicology, 2006. 220: p. 203 - 217.
138.   Li, K., et al., Molecular Mechanisms of Perfluorooctanoate-Induced Hepatocyte Apoptosis in Mice
       Using Proteomic Techniques. Environ Sci Technol, 2017. 51(19): p. 11380-11389.
139.   van Esterik, J.C., et al., Programming of metabolic effects in C57BL/6JxFVB mice by in utero and
       lactational exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid. Arch Toxicol, 2016. 90(3): p. 701-15.
140.   Wolf, D.C., et al., Comparative hepatic effects of perfluorooctanoic acid and WY 14,643 in PPAR-
       alpha knockout and wild-type mice. Toxicol Pathol, 2008. 36(4): p. 632-9.
141.   Rosen, M.B., et al., Gene profiling in the livers of wild-type and PPARalpha-null mice exposed to
       perfluorooctanoic acid. Toxicol Pathol, 2008. 36(4): p. 592-607.
142.   Das, K.P., et al., Perfluoroalkyl acids-induced liver steatosis: Effects on genes controlling lipid
       homeostasis. Toxicology, 2017. 378: p. 37-52.
143.   Li, K., et al., Molecular mechanisms of PFOA-induced toxicity in animals and humans:
       Implications for health risks. Environ Int, 2017. 99: p. 43-54.
144.   Hall, A.P., et al., Liver hypertrophy: a review of adaptive (adverse and non-adverse) changes--
       conclusions from the 3rd International ESTP Expert Workshop. Toxicol Pathol, 2012. 40(7): p.
       971-94.
145.   Albrecht, P.P., et al., A species difference in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
       alpha-dependent response to the developmental effects of perfluorooctanoic acid. Toxicol Sci,
       2013. 131(2): p. 568-82.



                                                   89
146.   Tucker, D.K., et al., The mammary gland is a sensitive pubertal target in CD-1 and C57Bl/6 mice
       following perinatal perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposure. Reprod Toxicol, 2015. 54: p. 26-36.
147.   White, S., et al., Gestational PFOA exposure of mice is associated with altered mammary gland
       development in dams and female offspring. Toxicol Sci, 2007. 96: p. 133 - 144.
148.   White, S.S., et al., Effects of perfluorooctanoic acid on mouse mammary gland development and
       differentiation resulting from cross-foster and restricted gestational exposures. Reprod Toxicol,
       2009. 27(3-4): p. 289-98.
149.   Darrow, L.A., et al., Modeled Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) Exposure and Liver Function in a
       Mid-Ohio Valley Community. Environ Health Perspect, 2016. 124(8): p. 1227-33.
150.   Jain, R.B. and A. Ducatman, Selective Associations of Recent Low Concentrations of Perfluoroalkyl
       Substances With Liver Function Biomarkers: NHANES 2011 to 2014 Data on US Adults Aged ≥20
       Years. J Occup Environ Med, 2019. 61(4): p. 293-302.
151.   Bassler, J., et al., Environmental perfluoroalkyl acid exposures are associated with liver disease
       characterized by apoptosis and altered serum adipocytokines. Environ Pollut, 2019. 247: p. 1055-
       1063.
152.   Mora, A.M., et al., Early life exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and mid-childhood
       lipid and alanine aminotransferase levels. Environ Int, 2018. 111: p. 1-13.
153.   Jin, R., et al., Perfluoroalkyl substances and severity of nonalcoholic fatty liver in Children: An
       untargeted metabolomics approach. Environ Int, 2020. 134: p. 105220.
154.   Bach, C.C., et al., Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances and human fetal growth: a
       systematic review. Crit Rev Toxicol, 2015. 45(1): p. 53-67.
155.   Wikstrom, S., et al., Maternal serum levels of perfluoroalkyl substances in early pregnancy and
       offspring birth weight. Pediatr Res, 2020. 87(6): p. 1093-1099.
156.   Barker, D.J.P., The Developmental Origins of Adult Disease. Journal of the American College of
       Nutrition, 2004. 23(sup6): p. 588S-595S.
157.   Verner, M.A., et al., Associations of Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) with Lower Birth Weight:
       An Evaluation of Potential Confounding by Glomerular Filtration Rate Using a Physiologically
       Based Pharmacokinetic Model (PBPK). Environ Health Perspect, 2015. 123(12): p. 1317-24.
158.   Negri, E., et al., Exposure to PFOA and PFOS and fetal growth: a critical merging of toxicological
       and epidemiological data. Crit Rev Toxicol, 2017. 47(6): p. 482-508.
159.   Steenland, K., V. Barry, and D. Savitz, Serum Perfluorooctanoic Acid and Birthweight: An Updated
       Meta-analysis With Bias Analysis. Epidemiology, 2018. 29(6): p. 765-776.
160.   Zhu, Y. and S.M. Bartell, Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in drinking water and birthweight in
       the US: A county-level study. Environ Epidemiol, 2020. 4(4): p. e0107.
161.   Govarts, E., et al., Combined Effects of Prenatal Exposures to Environmental Chemicals on Birth
       Weight. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2016. 13(5).
162.   Rappazzo, K.M., E. Coffman, and E.P. Hines, Exposure to Perfluorinated Alkyl Substances and
       Health Outcomes in Children: A Systematic Review of the Epidemiologic Literature. Int J Environ
       Res Public Health, 2017. 14(7).
163.   Lopez-Espinosa, M.J., et al., Perfluoroalkyl Substances, Sex Hormones, and Insulin-like Growth
       Factor-1 at 6-9 Years of Age: A Cross-Sectional Analysis within the C8 Health Project. Environ
       Health Perspect, 2016. 124(8): p. 1269-75.
164.   Kristensen, S.L., et al., Long-term effects of prenatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances on
       female reproduction. Hum Reprod, 2013. 28(12): p. 3337-48.
165.   Christensen, K.M., M; Rubin C; Holmes, C; Calafat, A; Kato, K; Flanders, WD; Heron, J;
       McGeehin, MA; and Marcus, M., Exposure to polyfluoroalkyl chemicals during pregnancy is not
       associated with offspring age at menarche in a contemporary British cohort. Environ Int., 2011.
       37(1): p. 129-135.


                                                   90
166.   Vested, A., et al., Associations of in utero exposure to perfluorinated alkyl acids with human
       semen quality and reproductive hormones in adult men. Environ Health Perspect, 2013. 121(4):
       p. 453-8.
167.   Ernst, A., et al., Exposure to Perfluoroalkyl Substances during Fetal Life and Pubertal
       Development in Boys and Girls from the Danish National Birth Cohort. Environ Health Perspect,
       2019. 127(1): p. 17004.
168.   Lind, D.V., et al., Prenatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances and anogenital distance at 3
       months of age in a Danish mother-child cohort. Reprod Toxicol, 2017. 68: p. 200-206.
169.   Fei, C., et al., Maternal concentrations of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) and
       perfluorooctanoate (PFOA) and duration of breastfeeding. Scand J Work Environ Health, 2010.
       36: p. 413 - 421.
170.   Timmermann, C.A., et al., Shorter duration of breastfeeding at elevated exposures to
       perfluoroalkyl substances. Reprod Toxicol, 2017. 68: p. 164-170.
171.   Romano, M.E., et al., Maternal serum perfluoroalkyl substances during pregnancy and duration
       of breastfeeding. Environ Res, 2016. 149: p. 239-246.
172.   Rosen, E.M., et al., Maternal Plasma Concentrations of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances and
       Breastfeeding Duration in the Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort. Environ Epidemiol, 2018.
       2(3): p. e027.
173.   Khalil, N., et al., Association of Perfluoroalkyl Substances, Bone Mineral Density, and
       Osteoporosis in the U.S. Population in NHANES 2009-2010. Environ Health Perspect, 2016.
       124(1): p. 81-7.
174.   Jeddy, Z., et al., Prenatal concentrations of perfluoroalkyl substances and bone health in British
       girls at age 17. Arch Osteoporos, 2018. 13(1): p. 84.
175.   Kralick, A.E. and B.S. Zemel, Evolutionary Perspectives on the Developing Skeleton and
       Implications for Lifelong Health. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne), 2020. 11: p. 99.
176.   Banjabi, A.A., et al., Serum concentrations of perfluoroalkyl substances and their association with
       osteoporosis in a population in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Environ Res, 2020. 187: p. 109676.
177.   Hoffman, K., et al., Exposure to polyfluoroalkyl chemicals and attention deficit hyperactivity
       disorder in U.S. children aged 12-15 years. Environ Health Perspect, 2010. 118: p. 1762 - 1767.
178.   Hoyer, B.B., et al., Pregnancy serum concentrations of perfluorinated alkyl substances and
       offspring behaviour and motor development at age 5-9 years--a prospective study. Environ
       Health, 2015. 14: p. 2.
179.   Stein, C.R. and D.A. Savitz, Serum perfluorinated compound concentration and attention
       deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children 5-18 years of age. Environ Health Perspect, 2011.
       119(10): p. 1466-71.
180.   Stein, C.R., D.A. Savitz, and D.C. Bellinger, Perfluorooctanoate exposure in a highly exposed
       community and parent and teacher reports of behaviour in 6-12-year-old children. Paediatr
       Perinat Epidemiol, 2014. 28(2): p. 146-56.
181.   Fei, C. and J. Olsen, Prenatal exposure to perfluorinated chemicals and behavioral or
       coordination problems at age 7 years. Environ Health Perspect, 2011. 119(4): p. 573-8.
182.   Quaak, I., et al., Prenatal Exposure to Perfluoroalkyl Substances and Behavioral Development in
       Children. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2016. 13(5).
183.   Johansson, N., A. Fredriksson, and P. Eriksson, Neonatal exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate
       (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) causes neurobehavioural defects in adult mice.
       Neurotoxicology, 2008. 29: p. 160 - 169.
184.   Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Health Effects Support Document for Perfluorooctane
       Sulfonate (PFOS). 2016, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Washington DC. p. 245.



                                                   91
185.   Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 40 CFR Part 721. Perfluoroalkyl Sulfonates; Significant
       New Use Rule, Final rule. 2002, Federal Register, December 9, 2002. p. 72854.
186.   Boucher, J.M., et al., Toward a Comprehensive Global Emission Inventory of C4–C10
       Perfluoroalkanesulfonic Acids (PFSAs) and Related Precursors: Focus on the Life Cycle of C6- and
       C10-Based Products. Environmental Science & Technology Letters, 2019. 6(1): p. 1-7.
187.   Worley, R.R., et al., Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in human serum and urine samples from
       a residentially exposed community. Environ Int, 2017. 106: p. 135-143.
188.   Lau, C., et al., Exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate during pregnancy in rat and mouse. II:
       postnatal evaluation. Toxicol Sci, 2003. 74: p. 382 - 392.
189.   Luebker, D.J., et al., Two-generation reproduction and cross-foster studies of
       perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) in rats. Toxicology, 2005. 215(1-2): p. 126-48.
190.   Luebker, D.J., et al., Neonatal mortality from in utero exposure to perfluorooctanesulfonate
       (PFOS) in Sprague-Dawley rats: dose-response, and biochemical and pharamacokinetic
       parameters. Toxicology, 2005. 215(1-2): p. 149-69.
191.   Dong, G., et al., Chronic effects of perfluorooctanesulfonate exposure on immunotoxicity in adult
       male C57BL/6 mice. Arch Toxicol, 2009. 83: p. 805 - 815.
192.   Dong, G.H., et al., Sub-chronic effect of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) on the balance of type 1
       and type 2 cytokine in adult C57BL6 mice. Arch Toxicol, 2011. 85(10): p. 1235-44.
193.   Peden-Adams, M., et al., Suppression of humoral immunity in mice following exposure to
       perfluorooctane sulfonate. Toxicol Sci, 2008. 104: p. 144 - 154.
194.   Zheng, L., et al., Immunotoxic changes associated with a 7-day oral exposure to
       perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) in adult male C57BL/6 mice. Arch Toxicol, 2009. 83: p. 679 -
       689.
195.   Guruge, K., et al., Effect of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) on influenza A virus-induced
       mortality in female B6C3F1 mice. J Toxicol Sci, 2009. 3: p. 687 - 691.
196.   Cui, L., et al., Studies on the toxicological effects of PFOA and PFOS on rats using histological
       observation and chemical analysis. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol, 2009. 56: p. 338 - 349.
197.   Xing, J., et al., Toxicity assessment of perfluorooctane sulfonate using acute and subchronic male
       C57BL/6J mouse models. Environ Pollut, 2016. 210: p. 388-96.
198.   Seacat, A.M., et al., Sub-chronic dietary toxicity of potassium perfluorooctanesulfonate in rats.
       Toxicology, 2003. 183(1-3): p. 117-31.
199.   Zhao, B., et al., Exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate in utero reduces testosterone production
       in rat fetal Leydig cells. PLoS One, 2014. 9(1): p. e78888.
200.   Li, L., et al., Perfluorooctane sulfonate impairs rat Leydig cell development during puberty.
       Chemosphere, 2018. 190: p. 43-53.
201.   Wan, H.T., et al., Testicular signaling is the potential target of perfluorooctanesulfonate-
       mediated subfertility in male mice. Biol Reprod, 2011. 84(5): p. 1016-23.
202.   Chang, S.C., et al., Thyroid hormone status and pituitary function in adult rats given oral doses of
       perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS). Toxicology, 2008. 243(3): p. 330-9.
203.   Yu, W., et al., Prenatal and postnatal impact of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) on rat
       development: a cross-foster study on chemical burden and thyroid hormone system. Environ Sci
       Technol, 2009. 43: p. 8416 - 8422.
204.   Butenhoff, J.L., et al., Chronic dietary toxicity and carcinogenicity study with potassium
       perfluorooctanesulfonate in Sprague Dawley rats. Toxicology, 2012. 293(1-3): p. 1-15.
205.   Nelson, J., E. Hatch, and T. Webster, Exposure to polyfluoroalkyl chemicals and cholesterol, body
       weight, and insulin resistance in the general U.S. population. Environ Health Perspect, 2010. 118:
       p. 197 - 202.



                                                   92
206.   Frisbee, S.J., et al., Perfluorooctanoic acid, perfluorooctanesulfonate, and serum lipids in children
       and adolescents: results from the C8 Health Project. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med, 2010. 164(9): p.
       860-9.
207.   Steenland, K., et al., Association of perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane sulfonate with
       serum lipids among adults living near a chemical plant. Am J Epidemiol, 2009. 170: p. 1268 -
       1278.
208.   Koustas, E., et al., The Navigation Guide - evidence-based medicine meets environmental health:
       systematic review of nonhuman evidence for PFOA effects on fetal growth. Environ Health
       Perspect, 2014. 122(10): p. 1015-27.
209.   Domazet, S.L., et al., Longitudinal Associations of Exposure to Perfluoroalkylated Substances in
       Childhood and Adolescence and Indicators of Adiposity and Glucose Metabolism 6 and 12 Years
       Later: The European Youth Heart Study. Diabetes Care, 2016. 39(10): p. 1745-51.
210.   Lin, C., et al., Association among serum perfluoroalkyl chemicals, glucose homeostasis, and
       metabolic syndrome in adolescents and adults. Diabetes Care, 2009. 32: p. 702 - 707.
211.   Liu, G., et al., Perfluoroalkyl substances and changes in body weight and resting metabolic rate in
       response to weight-loss diets: A prospective study. PLoS Med, 2018. 15(2): p. e1002502.
212.   Kim, M.J., et al., Association between perfluoroalkyl substances exposure and thyroid function in
       adults: A meta-analysis. PLoS One, 2018. 13(5): p. e0197244.
213.   Ballesteros, V., et al., Exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances and thyroid function in pregnant
       women and children: A systematic review of epidemiologic studies. Environ Int, 2017. 99: p. 15-
       28.
214.   Webster, G.M., et al., Cross-Sectional Associations of Serum Perfluoroalkyl Acids and Thyroid
       Hormones in U.S. Adults: Variation According to TPOAb and Iodine Status (NHANES 2007-2008).
       Environ Health Perspect, 2016. 124(7): p. 935-42.
215.   Melzer, D., et al., Association between serum perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and thyroid disease
       in the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Environ Health Perspect, 2010.
       118(5): p. 686-92.
216.   Webster, G.M., et al., Associations between perfluoroalkyl acids (PFASs) and maternal thyroid
       hormones in early pregnancy: a population-based cohort study. Environ Res, 2014. 133: p. 338-
       47.
217.   Shankar, A., J. Xiao, and A. Ducatman, Perfluoroalkyl chemicals and chronic kidney disease in US
       adults. Am J Epidemiol, 2011. 174(8): p. 893-900.
218.   New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, Health-Based Maximum Contaminant Level Support
       Document: PFOS. 2018, state.nj.us/dep/watersupply/pdf/pfos-recommendation-appendix-a.
219.   Wielsoe, M., P. Kern, and E.C. Bonefeld-Jorgensen, Serum levels of environmental pollutants is a
       risk factor for breast cancer in Inuit: a case control study. Environ Health, 2017. 16(1): p. 56.
220.   Tsai, M.S., et al., A case-control study of perfluoroalkyl substances and the risk of breast cancer
       in Taiwanese women. Environ Int, 2020. 142: p. 105850.
221.   Hurley, S., et al., Breast cancer risk and serum levels of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances: a
       case-control study nested in the California Teachers Study. Environ Health, 2018. 17(1): p. 83.
222.   New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, Maximum Contaminant Level Recommendation for
       Perfluorooctane Sulfonate in Drinking Water: Basis and Background. 2018:
       state.nj.us/dep/watersupply/pdf/pfos-recommendation-summary.
223.   Seacat, A., et al., Subchronic toxicity studies on perfluorooctanesulfonate potassium salt in
       cynomolgus monkeys. Toxicol Sci, 2002. 68: p. 249 - 264.
224.   Butenhoff, J.L., et al., Gestational and lactational exposure to potassium
       perfluorooctanesulfonate (K+PFOS) in rats: developmental neurotoxicity. Reprod Toxicol, 2009.
       27(3-4): p. 319-30.


                                                   93
225.   Keil, D.E., et al., Gestational exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonate suppresses immune function
       in B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol Sci, 2008. 103(1): p. 77-85.
226.   Wang, F., et al., Interaction of PFOS and BDE-47 co-exposure on thyroid hormone levels and TH-
       related gene and protein expression in developing rat brains. Toxicol Sci, 2011. 121(2): p. 279-91.
227.   Coperchini, F., et al., Thyroid Disrupting Effects of Old and New Generation PFAS. 2021.
       11(1077).
228.   Grandjean, P., et al., Serum vaccine antibody concentrations in children exposed to
       perfluorinated compounds. JAMA, 2012. 307(4): p. 391-7.
229.   Granum, B., et al., Pre-natal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances may be associated with
       altered vaccine antibody levels and immune-related health outcomes in early childhood. J
       Immunotoxicol, 2013. 10(4): p. 373-9.
230.   Stein, C.R., et al., Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances and indicators of immune
       function in children aged 12-19 y: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Pediatr
       Res, 2016. 79(2): p. 348-57.
231.   Kielsen, K., et al., Antibody response to booster vaccination with tetanus and diphtheria in adults
       exposed to perfluorinated alkylates. J Immunotoxicol, 2016. 13(2): p. 270-3.
232.   Grandjean, P., et al., Serum Vaccine Antibody Concentrations in Adolescents Exposed to
       Perfluorinated Compounds. Environ Health Perspect, 2017. 125(7): p. 077018.
233.   Fei, C., et al., Prenatal exposure to PFOA and PFOS and risk of hospitalization for infectious
       diseases in early childhood. Environ Res, 2010. 110(8): p. 773-7.
234.   Dalsager, L., et al., Association between prenatal exposure to perfluorinated compounds and
       symptoms of infections at age 1-4years among 359 children in the Odense Child Cohort. Environ
       Int, 2016. 96: p. 58-64.
235.   Impinen, A., et al., Maternal levels of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) during pregnancy and
       childhood allergy and asthma related outcomes and infections in the Norwegian Mother and
       Child (MoBa) cohort. Environ Int, 2019. 124: p. 462-472.
236.   Impinen, A., et al., Prenatal exposure to perfluoralkyl substances (PFASs) associated with
       respiratory tract infections but not allergy- and asthma-related health outcomes in childhood.
       Environ Res, 2018. 160: p. 518-523.
237.   Ait Bamai, Y., et al., Effect of prenatal exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances on
       childhood allergies and common infectious diseases in children up to age 7 years: The Hokkaido
       study on environment and children's health. Environ Int, 2020. 143: p. 105979.
238.   Looker, C., et al., Influenza vaccine response in adults exposed to perfluorooctanoate and
       perfluorooctanesulfonate. Toxicol Sci, 2014. 138(1): p. 76-88.
239.   Darrow, L.A., C.R. Stein, and K. Steenland, Serum perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane
       sulfonate concentrations in relation to birth outcomes in the Mid-Ohio Valley, 2005-2010.
       Environ Health Perspect, 2013. 121(10): p. 1207-13.
240.   Darrow, L.A., et al., PFOA and PFOS serum levels and miscarriage risk. Epidemiology, 2014. 25(4):
       p. 505-12.
241.   Dong, G.H., et al., Subchronic effects of perfluorooctanesulfonate exposure on inflammation in
       adult male C57BL/6 mice. Environ Toxicol, 2012. 27(5): p. 285-96.
242.   New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute, Health-Based Maximum Contaminant Level Support
       Document: Perfluorononanoic Acid (PFNA). 2015, New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute
       Health Effects Subcommittee: nj.gov/dep/watersupply/pdf/pfna-health-effects.
243.   Thackray, C.P., N.E. Selin, and C.J. Young, A global atmospheric chemistry model for the fate and
       transport of PFCAs and their precursors. Environ Sci Process Impacts, 2020. 22(2): p. 285-293.




                                                   94
244.   Guelfo, J.L. and D.T. Adamson, Evaluation of a national data set for insights into sources,
       composition, and concentrations of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in U.S. drinking
       water. Environ Pollut, 2018. 236: p. 505-513.
245.   Farallon Consulting, Per- and Poly-Fluoroalkyl Substances Characterization Study Summary
       Report, Lower Issaquah Valley, Issaquah, Washington. March 27, 2019. 2019:
       issaquahwa.gov/CivicAlerts.
246.   Jain, R.B., Contribution of diet and other factors to the levels of selected polyfluorinated
       compounds: data from NHANES 2003-2008. Int J Hyg Environ Health, 2014. 217(1): p. 52-61.
247.   National Toxicology Program, NTP Technical Report on the Toxicity Studies of Perfluoroalkyl
       Sulfonates (Perfluorobutane Sulfonic Acid, Perfluorohexane Sulfonate Potassium Salt, and
       Perfluorooctane Sulfonic Acid) Administered by Gavage to Sprague Dawley Rats 2019, U.S.
       Department of Health and Human Services: Research Triangle Park, NC.
248.   Wang, J., et al., Integrated proteomic and miRNA transcriptional analysis reveals the
       hepatotoxicity mechanism of PFNA exposure in mice. J Proteome Res, 2015. 14(1): p. 330-41.
249.   Das, K.P., et al., Developmental toxicity of perfluorononanoic acid in mice. Reprod Toxicol, 2015.
       51: p. 133-44.
250.   Mertens, J.J., et al., Subchronic toxicity of S-111-S-WB in Sprague Dawley rats. Int J Toxicol, 2010.
       29(4): p. 358-71.
251.   Stump, D.G., et al., An oral two-generation reproductive toxicity study of S-111-S-WB in rats.
       Reprod Toxicol, 2008. 25(1): p. 7-20.
252.   Feng, Y., et al., Perfluorononanoic acid induces apoptosis involving the Fas death receptor
       signaling pathway in rat testis. Toxicol Lett, 2009. 190(2): p. 224-30.
253.   Singh, S. and S.K. Singh, Prepubertal exposure to perfluorononanoic acid interferes with
       spermatogenesis and steroidogenesis in male mice. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf, 2019. 170: p. 590-
       599.
254.   Singh, S. and S.K. Singh, Chronic exposure to perfluorononanoic acid impairs spermatogenesis,
       steroidogenesis and fertility in male mice. J Appl Toxicol, 2019. 39(3): p. 420-431.
255.   Wolf, C.J., et al., Developmental effects of perfluorononanoic Acid in the mouse are dependent
       on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha. PPAR Res, 2010. 2010.
256.   Rosen, M.B., Schmid, J.E., Zehr, D., Das, K., Ren, H., Abbot, B.D., Lau, C., Corton, C.,
       Toxicogenomic profiling of perfluorononanoic acid in wild-type and PPAR alpha-null mice. The
       Toxicologist 2010. 47(114): p. 23.
257.   Rogers, J.M., et al., Elevated blood pressure in offspring of rats exposed to diverse chemicals
       during pregnancy. Toxicol Sci, 2014. 137(2): p. 436-46.
258.   Fang, X., et al., Immunotoxic effects of perfluorononanoic acid on BALB/c mice. Toxicol Sci, 2008.
       105: p. 312 - 321.
259.   Fang, X., et al., Alterations of cytokines and MAPK signaling pathways are related to the
       immunotoxic effect of perfluorononanoic acid. Toxicol Sci, 2009. 108(2): p. 367-76.
260.   Fang, X., et al., Perfluorononanoic acid-induced apoptosis in rat spleen involves oxidative stress
       and the activation of caspase-independent death pathway. Toxicology, 2010. 267(1-3): p. 54-9.
261.   New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute (NJ DWQI), Health-based Maximum Contaminant
       Level Support Document: Perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA) 2015, New Jersey Drinking Water
       Quality Institute Health Effects Subcommittee.
262.   Salihovic, S., et al., Changes in markers of liver function in relation to changes in perfluoroalkyl
       substances - A longitudinal study. Environ Int, 2018. 117: p. 196-203.
263.   Nian, M., et al., Liver function biomarkers disorder is associated with exposure to perfluoroalkyl
       acids in adults: Isomers of C8 Health Project in China. Environ Res, 2019. 172: p. 81-88.



                                                   95
264.   Dong, G.H., et al., Serum polyfluoroalkyl concentrations, asthma outcomes, and immunological
       markers in a case-control study of Taiwanese children. Environ Health Perspect, 2013. 121(4): p.
       507-13.
265.   Sagiv, S.K., et al., Early-Pregnancy Plasma Concentrations of Perfluoroalkyl Substances and Birth
       Outcomes in Project Viva: Confounded by Pregnancy Hemodynamics? Am J Epidemiol, 2018.
       187(4): p. 793-802.
266.   Rahman, M.L., et al., Persistent organic pollutants and gestational diabetes: A multi-center
       prospective cohort study of healthy US women. Environ Int, 2019. 124: p. 249-258.
267.   Jensen, T.K., et al., Association between perfluorinated compound exposure and miscarriage in
       Danish pregnant women. PLoS One, 2015. 10(4): p. e0123496.
268.   Michigan Science Advisory Workgroup, Health-based Drinking Water Value Recommendations
       for PFAS in Michigan. 2019, Michigan PFAS Action Response Team (MPART):
       michigan.gov/documents/pfasresponse/Health-
       based_Drinking_Water_Value_Recommendations_for_PFAS_in_Michigan_Report_659258_7.
269.   Rosen, M.B., et al., PPARalpha-independent transcriptional targets of perfluoroalkyl acids
       revealed by transcript profiling. Toxicology, 2017. 387: p. 95-107.
270.   Feng, Y., et al., Perfluorononanoic acid induces apoptosis involving the Fas death receptor
       signaling pathway in rat testis. Toxicol Lett, 2009. 190: p. 224 - 230.
271.   Singh, S. and S.K. Singh, Effect of gestational exposure to perfluorononanoic acid on neonatal
       mice testes. J Appl Toxicol, 2019. 39(12): p. 1663-1671.
272.   Park, H.J. and J.M. Choi, Sex-specific regulation of immune responses by PPARs. Exp Mol Med,
       2017. 49(8): p. e364.
273.   Vitti, M., et al., Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptors in Female Reproduction and
       Fertility. PPAR Res, 2016. 2016: p. 4612306.
274.   Louis, G.M., et al., Perfluorochemicals and human semen quality: the LIFE study. Environ Health
       Perspect, 2015. 123(1): p. 57-63.
275.   Joensen, U.N., et al., PFOS (perfluorooctanesulfonate) in serum is negatively associated with
       testosterone levels, but not with semen quality, in healthy men. Hum Reprod, 2013. 28(3): p.
       599-608.
276.   Tsai, M.S., et al., Association between perfluoroalkyl substances and reproductive hormones in
       adolescents and young adults. Int J Hyg Environ Health, 2015. 218(5): p. 437-43.
277.   Toft, G., et al., Exposure to perfluorinated compounds and human semen quality in Arctic and
       European populations. Hum Reprod, 2012. 27(8): p. 2532-40.
278.   Humblet, O., et al., Perfluoroalkyl chemicals and asthma among children 12-19 years of age:
       NHANES (1999-2008). Environ Health Perspect, 2014. 122(10): p. 1129-33.
279.   ECHA, ANNEX XV RESTRICTION REPORT. PROPOSAL FOR A RESTRICTION: Perfluorohexane
       sulfonic acid (PFHxS), its salts and PFHxS-related substances. 2019, European Chemicals Agency,
       Dossier Submitter: Norwegian Environment Agency, 13 June 2019,.
280.   Oliaei, F., et al., PFOS and PFC releases and associated pollution from a PFC production plant in
       Minnesota (USA). Environ Sci Pollut Res Int, 2013. 20(4): p. 1977-92.
281.   Beesoon, S., et al., Exceptionally high serum concentrations of perfluorohexanesulfonate in a
       Canadian family are linked to home carpet treatment applications. Environ Sci Technol, 2012.
       46(23): p. 12960-7.
282.   Nickerson, A., et al., Spatial Trends of Anionic, Zwitterionic, and Cationic PFASs at an AFFF-
       Impacted Site. Environ Sci Technol, 2021. 55(1): p. 313-323.
283.   Rauert, C., et al., Atmospheric concentrations and trends of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances
       (PFAS) and volatile methyl siloxanes (VMS) over 7 years of sampling in the Global Atmospheric
       Passive Sampling (GAPS) network. Environ Pollut, 2018. 238: p. 94-102.


                                                  96
284.   Butenhoff, J.L., et al., Evaluation of potential reproductive and developmental toxicity of
       potassium perfluorohexanesulfonate in Sprague Dawley rats. Reprod Toxicol, 2009. 27(3-4): p.
       331-41.
285.   Bijland, S., et al., Perfluoroalkyl sulfonates cause alkyl chain length-dependent hepatic steatosis
       and hypolipidemia mainly by impairing lipoprotein production in APOE*3-Leiden CETP mice.
       Toxicol Sci, 2011. 123(1): p. 290-303.
286.   Chang, S., et al., Reproductive and developmental toxicity of potassium
       perfluorohexanesulfonate in CD-1 mice. Reprod Toxicol, 2018. 78: p. 150-168.
287.   Ramhøj, L., et al., Perfluorohexane Sulfonate (PFHxS) and a Mixture of Endocrine Disrupters
       Reduce Thyroxine Levels and Cause Antiandrogenic Effects in Rats. Toxicol Sci, 2018. 163(2): p.
       579-591.
288.   National Toxicology Progam (NTP), 28-Day Evaluation of the Toxicity (C06100) of
       Perfluorohexane sulfonate potassium salt (PFHSKslt) (3871-99-6) in Harlan Sprague-Dawley Rats
       Exposed via Gavage. 2018, US Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle
       Park, NC manticore.niehs.nih.gov/cebssearch/test_article/3871-99-6.
289.   Viberg, H., I. Lee, and P. Eriksson, Adult dose-dependent behavioral and cognitive disturbances
       after a single neonatal PFHxS dose. Toxicology, 2013. 304: p. 185-91.
290.   Ramhøj, L., et al., Evaluating thyroid hormone disruption: investigations of long-term
       neurodevelopmental effects in rats after perinatal exposure to perfluorohexane sulfonate
       (PFHxS). Sci Rep, 2020. 10(1): p. 2672.
291.   Preston, E.V., et al., Maternal Plasma per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substance Concentrations in Early
       Pregnancy and Maternal and Neonatal Thyroid Function in a Prospective Birth Cohort: Project
       Viva (USA). Environ Health Perspect, 2018. 126(2): p. 027013.
292.   Preston, E.V., et al., Prenatal exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and maternal and
       neonatal thyroid function in the Project Viva Cohort: A mixtures approach. Environ Int, 2020.
       139: p. 105728.
293.   Li, Y., et al., Associations between perfluoroalkyl substances and serum lipids in a Swedish adult
       population with contaminated drinking water. Environ Health, 2020. 19(1): p. 33.
294.   Sundstrom, M., et al., Comparative pharmacokinetics of perfluorohexanesulfonate (PFHxS) in
       rats, mice, and monkeys. Reprod Toxicol, 2012. 33(4): p. 441-51.
295.   de Escobar, G.M., M.J. Obregon, and F.E. del Rey, Maternal thyroid hormones early in pregnancy
       and fetal brain development. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab, 2004. 18(2): p. 225-48.
296.   Ghassabian, A., et al., Downstream effects of maternal hypothyroxinemia in early pregnancy:
       nonverbal IQ and brain morphology in school-age children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 2014. 99(7):
       p. 2383-90.
297.   Korevaar, T.I., et al., Association of maternal thyroid function during early pregnancy with
       offspring IQ and brain morphology in childhood: a population-based prospective cohort study.
       Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol, 2016. 4(1): p. 35-43.
298.   Costeira, M.J., et al., Psychomotor development of children from an iodine-deficient region. J
       Pediatr, 2011. 159(3): p. 447-53.
299.   Henrichs, J., et al., Maternal hypothyroxinemia and effects on cognitive functioning in childhood:
       how and why? Clin Endocrinol (Oxf), 2013. 79(2): p. 152-62.
300.   Alexander, E.K., et al., 2017 Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the Diagnosis and
       Management of Thyroid Disease During Pregnancy and the Postpartum. Thyroid, 2017. 27(3): p.
       315-389.
301.   Thompson, W., et al., Maternal thyroid hormone insufficiency during pregnancy and risk of
       neurodevelopmental disorders in offspring: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin
       Endocrinol (Oxf), 2018. 88(4): p. 575-584.


                                                   97
302.   Boesen, S.A.H., et al., Exposure to Perflouroalkyl acids and foetal and maternal thyroid status: a
       review. Environ Health, 2020. 19(1): p. 107.
303.   Lewis, R.C., L.E. Johns, and J.D. Meeker, Serum Biomarkers of Exposure to Perfluoroalkyl
       Substances in Relation to Serum Testosterone and Measures of Thyroid Function among Adults
       and Adolescents from NHANES 2011-2012. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2015. 12(6): p. 6098-
       114.
304.   Andersson, E.M., et al., High exposure to perfluorinated compounds in drinking water and
       thyroid disease. A cohort study from Ronneby, Sweden. Environ Res, 2019. 176: p. 108540.
305.   Liew, Z., et al., Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and childhood autism in association with
       prenatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances: a nested case-control study in the Danish
       National Birth Cohort. Environ Health Perspect, 2015. 123(4): p. 367-73.
306.   Braun, J.M., et al., Gestational exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals and reciprocal social,
       repetitive, and stereotypic behaviors in 4- and 5-year-old children: the HOME study. Environ
       Health Perspect, 2014. 122(5): p. 513-20.
307.   Lyall, K., et al., Prenatal Maternal Serum Concentrations of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in
       Association with Autism Spectrum Disorder and Intellectual Disability. Environ Health Perspect,
       2018. 126(1): p. 017001.
308.   Papadopoulou, E., et al., Exposure of Norwegian toddlers to perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS):
       The association with breastfeeding and maternal PFAS concentrations. Environ Int, 2016. 94: p.
       687-94.
309.   Eurpoean Chemicals Agency (ECHA), Annex XV Proposal for Identification of a Substance of Very
       High Concern on the Basis of the Criteria set out in REACH Article 57: Perfluorobutane sulfonic
       acid (PFBS) and its salts. 2019, Submitted by Norway:
       echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/1e516c08-d91e-6da3-87f7-cc0679135422.
310.   Norwegian Environment Agency, Investigation of Sources to PFBS in the Environment. May 15,
       2017. miljodirektoratet.no/globalassets/publikasjoner/M759/M759
311.   Interstate Technology Regulatory Council (ITRC). Aqueous Film-Forming Foam (AFFF). 2018;
       Available from: pfas-1.itrcweb.org/fact_sheets_page/pfas-fact-sheet-afff-10-3-18.
312.   CA OEHHA, Notification Level Recommendation for Perfluorobutane Sulfonic Acid in Drinking
       Water. 2021, California Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Environmental Health
       Hazard Assessment: oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/water/chemicals/nl/pfbsnl121820.
313.   Olsen, G.W., et al., A comparison of the pharmacokinetics of perfluorobutanesulfonate (PFBS) in
       rats, monkeys, and humans. Toxicology, 2009. 256(1-2): p. 65-74.
314.   Lieder, P.H., et al., A two-generation oral gavage reproduction study with potassium
       perfluorobutanesulfonate (K+PFBS) in Sprague Dawley rats. Toxicology, 2009. 259(1-2): p. 33-45.
315.   Feng, X., et al., Exposure of Pregnant Mice to Perfluorobutanesulfonate Causes
       Hypothyroxinemia and Developmental Abnormalities in Female Offspring. Toxicol Sci, 2017.
       155(2): p. 409-419.
316.   York, R., Oral (gavage) developmental toxicity study of potassium perfluorobutane sulfonate
       (PFBS) in rats. (Argus Research Protocol Number 418023). 2002: St. Paul, MN.
317.   York, R., Oral (gavage) two -generation (one litter per generation) reproduction study of
       perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS) in rats. (Argus Research Protocol Number 418021). 2003:
       Washington, D.C.
318.   Lieder, P.H., et al., Toxicological evaluation of potassium perfluorobutanesulfonate in a 90-day
       oral gavage study with Sprague-Dawley rats. Toxicology, 2009. 255(1-2): p. 45-52.
319.   3M Company, A 28-day oral (gavage) toxicity study of T-7485 in Sprague-Dawley rats. (Study
       Number: 132-007). 2001: St. Paul, MN.



                                                   98
320.   Minnesota Department of Health (MDH). Health Based Guidance for Water. Toxicological
       Summary for perfluorobutane sulfate. 2017 December 2017; Available from:
       health.state.mn.us/communities/environment/risk/docs/guidance/gw/pfbssummary.
321.   Lau, C., et al., Pharmacokinetic profile of Perfluorobutane Sulfonate and activation of hepatic
       nuclear receptor target genes in mice. Toxicology, 2020. 441: p. 152522.
322.   Rumpler, J., Das, K., Wood, C., Lau, C., Strynar, M., Wambaugh, J., Lau, C,, Pharmacokinetic
       profiles of perfluorobutane sulfonate and activation of hepatic genes in mice. The Toxicologist,
       Supplement to Toxicological Sciences, 2016. 150(1).
323.   Corsini, E., et al., In vitro characterization of the immunotoxic potential of several perfluorinated
       compounds (PFCs). Toxicol Appl Pharmacol, 2012. 258(2): p. 248-55.
324.   Zhu, Y., et al., Associations of serum perfluoroalkyl acid levels with T-helper cell-specific cytokines
       in children: By gender and asthma status. Sci Total Environ, 2016. 559: p. 166-173.
325.   Min, H., et al., Maternal Hypothyroxinemia-Induced Neurodevelopmental Impairments in the
       Progeny. Mol Neurobiol, 2016. 53(3): p. 1613-1624.
326.   van den Hove, M.F., et al., Hormone synthesis and storage in the thyroid of human preterm and
       term newborns: effect of thyroxine treatment. Biochimie, 1999. 81(5): p. 563-70.
327.   American Thyroid Association. Hypothyroidism in Pregnancy. [cited 2021 April]; Available from:
       thyroid.org/hypothyroidism-in-pregnancy.
328.   Kowalczyk, J., et al., Absorption, distribution, and milk secretion of the perfluoroalkyl acids PFBS,
       PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA by dairy cows fed naturally contaminated feed. J Agric Food Chem, 2013.
       61(12): p. 2903-12.
329.   Numata, J., et al., Toxicokinetics of seven perfluoroalkyl sulfonic and carboxylic acids in pigs fed a
       contaminated diet. J Agric Food Chem, 2014. 62(28): p. 6861-70.
330.   Blaine, A.C., et al., Perfluoroalkyl acid distribution in various plant compartments of edible crops
       grown in biosolids-amended soils. Environ Sci Technol, 2014. 48(14): p. 7858-65.
331.   Blaine, A.C., et al., Perfluoroalkyl acid uptake in lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and strawberry (Fragaria
       ananassa) irrigated with reclaimed water. Environ Sci Technol, 2014. 48(24): p. 14361-8.
332.   Blaine, A.C., et al., Uptake of perfluoroalkyl acids into edible crops via land applied biosolids: field
       and greenhouse studies. Environ Sci Technol, 2013. 47(24): p. 14062-9.
333.   European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), Draft scientific opinion on risks to human health related
       to the presence of perfluoroalkyl substances in food 2020, EFSA Panel on Contaminants in the
       Food Chain:
       efsa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/consultation/consultation/PFAS_Draft_Opinion_for_public_c
       onsultation_Part_I.
334.   FDA, Analytical Results for PFAS in 2019 Total Diet Study Sampling Datasets 1 and 2. 2019, U.S.
       Food and Drug Administration: fda.gov/food/chemicals/and-polyfluoroalkyl-substances-pfas.

335.   Glynn, A., et al., Perfluorinated alkyl acids in blood serum from primiparous women in Sweden:
       serial sampling during pregnancy and nursing, and temporal trends 1996-2010. Environ Sci
       Technol, 2012. 46(16): p. 9071-9.
336.   Wang, Y., et al., Efficiency of maternal-fetal transfer of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl
       substances. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int, 2019. 26(3): p. 2691-2698.




                                                     99
