    PFOS and PFOA in Drinking-water: Background document for development of WHO
                         Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality

Background


In view of the public health concerns of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), the World Health
Organization (WHO) initiated the development of a background document for the Guidelines for
drinking-water quality (GDWQ) on PFAS in drinking-water with a focus on perfluorooctane sulfonate
(PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). The process was initiated in 2017. Preliminary drafts were
discussed at numerous consultations with the authors and the chemical working group, including in
July 2018, April 2019, March 2021 and October 2021. The document also went through a peer review
process in 2021, with the feedback provided considered by the chemical working group. As part of
this process, the draft background document was offered for public consultation from 29 September
to 11 November 2022, during which 25 sets of comments were received from different stakeholders.


WHO’s responses to the most common comments received during the public consultation period


Comment: The WHO's conclusion that the scientific uncertainties are too significant to derive a
health-based value for PFOS and PFOA is incorrect. Addressing scientific uncertainty is inherent to the
practice of risk assessment and is not a justifiable reason for not establishing a health-based guideline
value.

        Response: The derivation of health-based guideline values for PFOS and PFOA is technically
        possible and is not necessarily precluded by scientific uncertainty. The uncertainty in this case
        refers principally to a lack of consensus on key issues raised below, rather than uncertainty
        which could be characterized. The draft background document cites health-based values
        derived by multiple authoritative agencies, including: Health Canada, U.S. Environmental
        Protection Agency, European Food Safety Authority, U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and
        Disease Registry, and others. The draft document also points out that health-based values
        established previously span orders of magnitude. Therefore, recognizing that multiple health-
        based values for PFOA and PFOS have already been established, and further recognizing the
        lack of scientific consensus on the key end point and risk assessment approach for these
        compounds, WHO proposed for its draft background document, a provisional guideline value
        based on technical achievability, while emphasizing the need to achieve contamination levels
        as low as reasonably practical. In parallel the background document emphasized the need to
        prevent contamination of water sources and to stop non-essential uses of PFAS.

        However, in response to multiple requests from stakeholders, recognizing the value of
        assessing the evidence beyond PFOS and PFOA and to ensure that the latest evidence is taken
        into account since the background document was drafted, WHO will be undertaking a more
        comprehensive review on PFAS that will include further examination of whether international
        health-based guideline values can be established.
Comment: The provisional guideline value of 100 ng/L for PFOA and PFOS proposed in the WHO draft
background document is not sufficiently health-protective because it is significantly higher than other
health-based values recently derived by other agencies. Further, treatment technologies are available
to achieve much greater removal efficiencies than those suggested in the draft document.

        Response: The provisional guideline value of 100 ng/L for PFOA and PFOS proposed in the draft
        background document is not a health-based value and the draft background document does
        not suggest this is a safe level of exposure. Therefore, the WHO’s proposed provisional
        guideline value should not be compared to health-based values established by other agencies.

        The draft background document found that high pressure membrane processes, adsorption
        and ion-exchange can reduce PFOS and PFOA contamination levels by ≥ 90%, and that these
        technologies can consistently and reliably reduce PFAS-contaminated waters to below 100
        ng/L. However, the draft background document did not intend to suggest that these
        technologies couldn’t reduce PFOS and PFOA contamination to concentrations lower than 100
        ng/L. Therefore, the provisional guideline value should not be interpreted as the lowest
        concentrations of PFOA and PFOS that can be achieved with available treatment technologies;
        in fact, it is expected that well-operated treatment processes designed for PFAS removal are
        able to achieve concentrations well below this value.

        Instead, the provisional guideline value of 100 ng/L was proposed recognizing that achieving
        lower levels is unlikely to be feasible globally, especially for resource limited countries and
        contexts that do not have these systems in place or do not have the ability to consistently
        operate them effectively. WHO guideline values are developed to inform the establishment of
        national standards and regulations, and therefore take into account that there is limited
        benefit in establishing requirements that cannot practically be achieved. It should also be
        noted that WHO guideline values usually consider “reasonably practicable treatment”, where
        this is usually interpreted as conventional water treatment (coagulation, flocculation, filtration
        and chlorination). Nevertheless, the draft document emphasizes that the provisional guideline
        values “should not be considered as licenses to allow contamination (up to these levels)”, and
        further advises that Member States “should strive to achieve concentrations that are as low
        as reasonably practical, even when lower than the provisional guideline value.”

        It is recognized that this is an area of active research with new data continuing to emerge and
        therefore WHO will keep the state of science on treatment achievability under review.

Comment: The WHO draft background document did not incorporate a systematic review of the
literature, and therefore attempts to draw conclusions on health effects without considering all the
relevant data.

        Response: WHO’s draft background document was prepared in line with WHO's Policies and
        procedures manual for developing the Guidelines for drinking-water quality. In preparing
        chemical background documents for the Guidelines for drinking-water quality, WHO does not
        usually carry out stand-alone systematic reviews. Instead, the background documents,
        including the drinking-water guideline values are, where possible, based on up to date
        assessments carried out by WHO (e.g. monographs in the Environmental Health Criteria or
        CICAD series). In the absence of a suitable WHO assessment, the background documents may
        instead be based on one or more recent high-quality peer-reviewed national assessments.
        Accordingly, in the absence of a WHO assessment on PFAS, the background document
       considered the evidence reviews conducted by multiple national and regional agencies,
       providing a summary of the literature for each health endpoint of concern with details on a
       subset of the data. This intent was stated in the background document; for example, in section
       4 on human health effects, it states: “Although this section highlights several studies related
       to the toxicological effects of PFOA and PFOS exposure in humans as illustrative examples, it
       is not intended to be a comprehensive summary of all the data available.”

Comment: The names and affiliations of those who contributed to the document are not transparent
and there is concern about potential conflict(s) of interest.

       The development of the document was overseen by an expert working group and included an
       external peer review process. All peer reviewers, working group members, and contributing
       authors were required to declare any potential conflicts of interest and signed a declaration of
       interest form. None of these individuals disclosed any interests that precluded their
       involvement in the development of the background document. Traditionally, WHO has
       published the names of all those who are involved in preparation of a background document
       for the Guidelines for drinking-water quality only in the final background document. In
       response to concerns raised post the public review process, WHO has made available the
       names of key contributors to the background document. Specifically, the names of the lead
       authors, chemical working group members who guided document development and peer
       reviewers are included on the WHO webpage: PFOS and PFOA in drinking-water: background
       document for development of WHO Guidelines for drinking-water quality. As noted on the
       webpage, these contributors disclosed interests related to PFAS and it was determined that
       no interests were declared that precluded involvement in development of the draft
       background document.

       WHO will continue to only engage experts in its work on PFAS, including the wider assessment
       on PFAS, who have signed WHO’s declaration of interest form and have been determined to
       not have any conflicts that would preclude involvement. Furthermore, the names of all experts
       who will be involved in the wider WHO assessment on PFAS will be posted on WHO’s website
       throughout the development process.


Additional information

The draft background document mentions chemical guideline values. What are those?

       A guideline value normally represents the concentration of a constituent that does not result
       in any significant risk to health over a lifetime of consumption. The health effects
       information in the chemical background documents, including guideline values, are usually
       based on international chemical risk assessments (e.g. from WHO’s chemical safety team). In
       the absence of a suitable WHO assessment, guideline values may be based on one or more
       recent high quality, peer reviewed national or regional assessments.

       In certain cases, WHO recommends a provisional guideline value that is higher than the
       health-based value (i.e. based on a chemical risk assessment). The provisional guideline
       value takes into account practical issues, including those associated with the feasibility of
        monitoring or treating the contaminant1. WHO has established a number of provisional
        guideline values at concentrations that are reasonably achievable through practical
        treatment approaches or that are detectable by standard analytical methods.

        Chemical guideline values should be adapted in national standards and regulations, including
        establishing stricter values in national standards compared to the provisional guideline
        values, when resources are available.

Who were the experts who participated in developing the GDWQ?

        The contributors included the experts from the Guideline Development Group and working
        groups for the Guidelines for drinking-water quality: Fourth edition incorporating the first
        and second addenda, who formulate the recommendations related to chemical, microbial
        or protection and control aspects based on the evidence. Their names can be found in the
        Acknowledgement section of the Guidelines.

        Additional contributors provide expertise and comments for all WHO assessments of
        drinking-water contaminants, including for PFOS and PFOA. For the PFOS and PFOA
        document, their names will be included in the final background document. As of 29
        September 2022, contributors include:

        •    Dr Ruth Bevan, independent consultant, United Kingdom; Mr Brad Lampe, WHO
             Collaborating Centre NSF International; Professor Peter Jarvis, Cranfield University,
             United Kingdom; and Professor John Fawell, Cranfield University, United Kingdom
             prepared the initial drafts of the background document, under the coordination of WHO
             and its experts from the chemical working group.
        •    Experts from the chemical working group of WHO’s Guidelines for Drinking-water
             Quality guided the development of this document: Dr Mari Asami, National Institute of
             Public Health, Japan; Mr Richard Carrier, Health Canada, Canada; Dr Joseph Cotruvo,
             Joseph Cotruvo & Associates, United States of America; Dr David Cunliffe, South
             Australian Department of Health, Australia; Dr Alexander Eckhardt, Umweltbundesamt
             (Federal Environment Agency), Germany; Dr Akihiko Hirose, National Institute of Health
             Sciences of Japan, Japan; Dr Peter Marsden, formerly Drinking Water Inspectorate,
             United Kingdom; Dr Ed Ohanian, Environmental Protection Agency, United States of
             America; Professor Choon Nam Ong, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Dr
             Betsy Behl, Environmental Protection Agency, United States of America; and Dr
             Emanuela Testai, National Institute of Health, Italy.
        •    Peer reviewers included Antonia Calafat, CDC, United States of America; Milou
             Dingemans, KWR Water Research Institute, the Netherlands; Dr Michael Dourson,
             Toxicology Excellence for Risk Assessment, United States of America; Nick Fletcher,
             Food Standards Australia New Zealand, Australia; Tony Fletcher, London School of
             Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom; Philippe Grandjean, University of
             Southern Denmark and Harvard T.H. Chan, School of Public Health, Denmark and United
             States of America; Roberta Hoffman-Caris, KWR Water Research Institute, the

1
  An example of a provisional guideline value is the value established for lead at 10 μg/L. Although
there is no apparent safe level of lead, this value takes into account difficulties in achieving lower
values where lead-containing materials are used in water systems.
             Netherlands; Philip McCleaf, Uppsala Vatten Och Avfall AB, Sweden; Katie Pelch,
             University of North Texas Health Science Center, United States of America; Marc-Andre
             Verner, University of Montreal, Canada; Graham White, formerly Health Canada,
             Canada; and additional experts from the Environmental Protection Agency, United
             States of America.
       •     WHO Unit on Water, Sanitation, Hygiene and Health provided coordination, strategic
             direction and liaison with the WHO Unit on Chemical Safety and Health.

Did the experts and contributors declare their conflicts of interest?

       All authors, chemical working group members and peer reviewers have disclosed
       circumstances that could give rise to actual or ostensible conflicts of interest and have signed
       a Declaration of Interest form. No authors, working group members or reviewers declared
       any interests that were considered by the WHO Secretariat to preclude their involvement in
       development of the draft background document.
