 253 envhper Environmental Health Perspectives Environ Health Perspect American Chemical Society PMC10718298 10718298 10718298 38088889 10.1289/EHP11969 Exploring Route-Specific Pharmacokinetics of PFAS in Mice by Coupling in Vivo Tests and Physiologically Based Toxicokinetic Models Zhu Yumin 1 Pan Xiaoyu 2 Jia Yibo 1 Yang Xin 1 Song Xiaohua 1 Ding Jiaqi 1 Zhong Wenjue 1 Feng Jianfeng 1 Zhu Lingyan 1 ✉ 1 Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, P. R. China 2 Beijing Sankuai Online Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, P. R. China ✉ Address correspondence to Lingyan Zhu, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, 38 Tongyan Road, Jinnan District, Tianjin, P.R. China 300350. Email: zhuly@nankai.edu.cn ✉ Corresponding author. 13 12 2023 131 12 127012 127012 13 12 2023 EHP is an open-access journal published with support from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health. All content is public domain unless otherwise noted. Abstract Background: Oral ingestion, inhalation, and skin contact are important exposure routes for humans to uptake per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). However, nasal and dermal exposure to PFAS remains unclear, and accurately predicting internal body burden of PFAS in humans via multiple exposure pathways is urgently required. Objectives: We aimed to develop multiple physiologically based toxicokinetic (PBTK) models to unveil the route-specific pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of PFAS via respective oral, nasal, and dermal exposure pathways using a mouse model and sought to predict the internal concentrations in various tissues through multiple exposure routes and extrapolate it to humans. Methods: Mice were administered the mixed solution of perfluorohexane sulfonate, perfluorooctane sulfonate, and perfluorooctanoic acid through oral, nasal, and dermal exposure separately or jointly. The time-dependent concentrations of PFAS in plasma and tissues were determined to calibrate and validate the individual and combined PBTK models, which were applied in single- and repeated-dose scenarios. Results: The developed route-specific PBTK models successfully simulated the tissue concentrations of PFAS in mice following single or joint exposure routes as well as long-term repeated dose scenarios. The time to peak concentration of PFAS in plasma via dermal exposure was much longer (34.1–83.0 h) than that via nasal exposure (0.960 h). The bioavailability of PFAS via oral exposure was the highest (73.2%–98.0%), followed by nasal (33.9%–66.8%) and dermal exposure (4.59%–7.80%). This model was extrapolated to predict internal levels in human under real environment. Discussion: Based on these data, we predict the following: PFAS were absorbed quickly via nasal exposure, whereas a distinct hysteresis effect was observed for dermal exposure. Almost all the PFAS to which mice were exposed via gastrointestinal route were absorbed into plasma, which exhibited the highest bioavailability. Exhalation clearance greatly depressed the bioavailability of PFAS via nasal exposure, whereas the lowest bioavailability in dermal exposure was because of the interception of PFAS within the skin layers. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP11969 status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Supplemental Material is available online ( https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP11969 ). The authors have no conflicts to declare. Note to readers with disabilities: EHP strives to ensure that all journal content is accessible to all readers. However, some figures and Supplemental Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to the complexity of the information being presented. If you need assistance accessing journal content, please contact ehpsubmissions@niehs.nih.gov . Our staff will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within 3 working days. Received 2022 Aug 4; Revised 2023 Sep 8; Accepted 2023 Nov 8; Collection date 2023 Dec. Introduction Since the 1950s, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) have been widely used in a variety of industrial and household fields owing to their excellent surface activity, thermal and chemical stability, and hydro- and oleophobic nature. 1 These qualities inevitably led to their ubiquitous occurrence and distribution in global ecosystems. 2 In particular, a growing body of evidence of toxic effects of some PFAS, such as perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS), prompt global regulations and limitations on them and on related compounds. 3 A couple of PFAS with chain length shorter than PFOA and PFOS, such as perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS), have been mass-produced assuming their lower accumulation potential and toxicities. 4 However, it has been demonstrated that PFHxS tended to accumulate with a longer half-life than that of PFOS in humans and also exhibited harmful effects on human health. 5 – 7 Thus, PFHxS has been proposed for restriction under the Stockholm Convention. 8 Humans are exposed to persistent organic pollutants mainly through dietary consumption of food and water, inhalation of air, ingestion of particulate matter, and skin contact with dust, clothing, or cosmetics. 9 Epidemiological studies and exposure investigations reported that oral ingestion was the main exposure route of PFAS. 10 However, an increasing number of studies have shown that nasal and dermal exposure also made a distinct contribution to PFAS load in the human body, particularly in some special populations. 9 , 11 It was reported that exposure via respiration accounted for 82% and 77% of the total intake of PFOS and PFOA in children, respectively, in a dust-rich environment. 11 The detection of PFAS in masks gives another route for inhalation exposure. 12 Given the high levels of PFAS detected in cosmetics ( 22 – 10,500 ng / g ), dermal exposure might make a great contribution to the people who frequently apply cosmetics containing PFAS. 13 Associations between the environmental levels of PFAS and their concentrations in human serum have been observed. 14 – 16 For example, frequent seafood consumption was associated with elevated PFAS serum concentrations in Inuit people in Greenland, 14 whalers in the Faroe Islands, 15 and fishery employees in China. 16 A significant correlation was also found between the levels of PFOA in the outdoor activity hand-wipes and human serum. 17 High-level PFAS concentrations were observed in the serum of workers who often inhaled aerosols of PFAS. 18 However, up to now, there is sparse information on the quantitative relationship between route-specific external exposure levels and internal concentrations of PFAS. Compared with traditional compartment models, physiologically based toxicokinetic (PBTK) model can simulate the absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination (ADME) of pollutants by properly including description of the physiological parameters of absorption sites and kinetic parameters of the absorption processes, providing a powerful tool to understand the pharmacokinetics via different exposure routes. 19 However, the present PBTK models are based on the assumption that PFAS are injected directly into the blood intravenously or only include gastrointestinal absorption of PFAS. 20 , 21 To our knowledge, no dermal or nasal PBTK model for PFAS has been developed, let alone been used in the comparison between different exposure routes. In addition, only PFOS or PFOA was selected as the target compound in most of the previous PBTK models without considering other PFAS such as PFHxS. 22 – 24 Only the proportion of a chemical that reaches the systemic circulation is considered to be bioavailable, which is generally &lt; 100 % for organic pollutants based on in vivo mouse model. 25 , 26 The bioavailability of a compound is dependent on the exposure routes because the compound undergoes different absorption processes such as digestion in gastrointestinal tract, skin interception, and pulmonary gas exchange. 27 According to mouse and rat studies, &gt; 95 % of orally administered PFAS are rapidly absorbed through oral exposure and primarily accumulate in plasma, liver, and kidney. 27 – 29 However, there is sparse information about the dermal or nasal exposure to PFAS. In a study in which rats received 6 h of nose-only exposure to PFOA-spiked aerosols, the time to reach the peak concentration ( T max ) of PFOA in male rat plasma was ∼ 3 h after exposure, 30 which was even quicker than with a single oral exposure (10 h). 27 To our knowledge, the bioavailability of PFAS following nasal exposure is unknown. For dermal exposure, one of our recent studies using an in vivo rat model observed that dermal penetration of PFAS in rats with C F &gt; 5 [including six perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCA), two perfluorosulfonate acids (PFSA), and two polyfluoroalkyl phosphate diesters (diPAP)] lasted a long period with a T max of 72 h. 31 It suggests that 4.1%–18.0% of the applied PFAS were absorbed into the rat blood 144 h after dermal dosing, which was dependent on their physicochemical properties. 31 Due to the few data and inconsistent exposure doses and durations applied in these studies, it is difficult to determine the influence of exposure routes on absorption kinetics, and in-depth studies are warranted. Most current risk assessment studies on PFAS via different exposure pathways were based on the external levels of PFAS in the exposure media, which might overestimate the exposure risks because the pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of PFAS were not considered. 17 , 32 It is imperative to develop models to accurately evaluate the internal exposure levels of PFAS by comprehensively considering the multiple exposure routes and the specific bioavailability. In this study, PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS were selected as target compounds, considering that they are highly detected in various environmental matrices, with various functional groups or chain lengths, recalcitrance for biotransformation, 27 , 33 which is conducive to tracking and comparing their in vivo pharmacokinetics. Single-dose exposure experiments were conducted following separate and joint oral, nasal, dermal, and intravenous administration. The uptake and elimination kinetics of PFAS via different routes and the route-specific bioavailability of PFAS were investigated systematically, which allowed us to calibrate and validate the route-specific PBTK models for PFAS. Then the established models were evaluated under repeated exposure scenarios derived from previous studies, and then we further extrapolated to humans. This study established a reliable platform to quantitatively describe the correlation between external exposure via different routes to internal body loads of PFAS. Method and Materials Chemicals and Materials The native and mass labeled standards of PFHxS, PFOS, PFOA were purchased from Wellington Laboratories (L-PFHxS, L-PFOS, L-PFOS, and MPFAS-MXA) (Table S1). Sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 96%) and tetrabutyl ammonium hydrogen sulfate (TBAHs) were obtained from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. (S835850 and T819011). Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) was obtained from Concord Science and Technology (8051). Mice Treatment Male CD-1 mice of 33 ± 3 g were purchased from Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., and the animal experiments were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Institute of Radiation Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (Approval Number: IRM-DWLL-2021189). The mice were housed in polypropylene mouse cages with a 12 h light/dark cycle and were given free access to regular mouse chow and water. The mice were randomly assigned into nine groups after 1 wk of acclimatization (Table S2). They were dosed through separate exposure routes, including single gavage (SG), nasal drip (ND), and intradermal injection (ID; outer thigh skin) to simulate oral, nasal, and dermal exposures, respectively. ND introduces liquid into the nostrils, allowing the compound to pass through the respiratory tract autonomously into the lung. In brief, the mouse was held up with their nostrils pointing straight up, and then 50 μ L of the mixed PFAS solution was dropped into one nostril through a syringe. To control the applied dosage accurately, ID, which bypasses the process of epidermal penetration, was used. The skin on the outer thigh was carefully shaved before injection. The needle was gently inserted into the skin for a few millimeters while being held virtually parallel to the skin’s surface. A bleb will develop following an effective injection. To calculate the bioavailability of PFAS via different exposure routes, a tail intravenous injection (IV) group was set up to calibrate related parameters of the PBTK models (discussed later). The mice were fasted overnight before administration. Mixed PFAS solutions of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA at equal concentrations were prepared. Low ( 1 mg / kg body weight for each PFAS; Table S2, Groups 1–4) and high dosage levels ( 5 mg / kg body weight for each PFAS; Table S2, Groups 5–8) and a blank control consisting of 0.5% of Tween-20 in pure Milli-Q water were set up for each exposure route, and all treatments were conducted with four replicates ( n = 4 ). Following the guidance for administered volume, 34 – 36 the mice in the SG, ND, ID, and IV groups were dosed with 330 μ L of 100 g / L (or 500 g / L ), 50 μ L of 660 g / L (or 1,320 g / L ), 50 μ L of 660 g / L (or 1,320 g / L ), and 100 μ L of 330 g / L (or 1,650 g / L ) the mixed solutions, respectively, for the low-level (or high-level) dosed groups so that the dosages in the mice were similar among the different route exposure groups. On 4 h, 16 h, and days 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 post dosage, the mice were euthanized through cervical dislocation to collect plasma (from the orbital vein), liver, kidney, lung, and skin of the outer thighs (only sampled in orally, nasally, and intravenously dosed groups). The collected tissue was immediately stored at − 20 ° C before analysis. To simulate the realistic scenario where organisms and humans are usually exposed to PFAS via multiple exposure pathways simultaneously, another group of mice was exposed to PFAS through the three routes concomitantly, each at a dosage of 1 mg / kg body weight (Table S2, Group 9) ( n = 4 ). Plasma, liver, and kidney were sampled on days 2, 16, and 32 and processed following the procedure described above. Extraction and Instrumental Analysis The mice livers, kidneys, and lungs were homogenized with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) by a Freezer Mixer (1:3, 1:1, 1:2 wt/vol, respectively). The mouse skin was cut into pieces with anatomical scissors. Before sample extraction, 1 ng of isotopically labeled standards were added to a 15 mL polypropylene tube that contained the homogenized tissue samples ( 10 μ L of plasma, 10 μ L of liver homogenate, 20 μ L of kidney homogenate, 50 μ L of lung homogenate, 100 mg of skin, respectively). 37 Next, 1 mL of 0.5 M TBAH ( pH = 10 ), 2 mL of 0.25 M sodium carbonate buffer, and 5 mL of MTBE were added and then shaken at 250 rpm for 20 min. The organic phase was collected in a new PP tube after centrifuging at 6,000 rpm for 10 min. The extraction process was repeated, and the organic extracts were combined and then almost dried out under nitrogen. Following that, 5 mL of methanol was added to reconstitute the mixture. A Cleanert PEP cartridge (Bonna-Agela Technologies) was used to purify the concentrated extract after it had been preconditioned with 10 mL of methanol and 10 mL of water. This process was followed by washing with 5 mL of 20% methanol in water. The target chemicals were pumped dry and then eluted with 10 mL of methanol. Under nitrogen flow, the eluate was evaporated to dryness before being reconstituted in 0.5 mL of methanol. After that, samples were filtered for ultra-high performance liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) analysis using a 0.22 - μ m filter. The three target PFAS were analyzed on a Vanquish UPLC system combined with a TSQ Altis quadrupole mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a BEH C18 column (Table S3). Quality Assurance and Quality Control PFAS were quantified using isotopically labeled standards ( 2 ng / mL ). The average recovery of PFAS in the spiked samples was 103 ± 6.15 % (Table S4). Thus, the concentrations were reported directly without correction by recoveries. Interday and intraday precision and accuracy of the assay were determined by analyzing three quality control samples on the same day ( n = 6 ) and three consecutive days ( n = 6 ). The recovery of intraday and interday injections ranged from 94.8% to 104.6% and 92.6% to 102%, respectively. The coefficients of variation of intraday and interday recovery were 3.60% and 3.78%. Duplicate analysis was included for every 10 samples, and the average relative standard deviation of the duplicate analysis was 3.70%. A procedure blank and one solvent blank (HPLC grade methanol) were carried out after 10 samples to monitor for any background contamination and instrument carryover. No target compounds were observed in the procedure blanks or solvent blanks. Blind duplicate samples and standards were analyzed for each batch of 10 samples to examine the stability of the instrument. The method detection limit is shown in Table S5. PBTK Modeling Description of the route-specific PBTK models. Based on the PBTK models for prediction of PFAS in mice, rats, monkeys, and humans reported in literatures, 24 , 38 the PBTK models via the individual exposure routes in this study consisted of compartments representing plasma, liver, kidney, lung, dermis, and the rest of the body ( Figure 1 ). Only stomach, intestines, and chamber were included in the oral and dermal exposure groups, respectively. Lung and skin were merely considered as the storage compartments in the nonnasal and nondermal routes, respectively, where no absorption, metabolism or elimination occurred. All the tissues are perfusion limited and well mixed. 39 Biotransformation was not included because of the strong stability of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA in organisms. 27 Lung and dermis served as a storage compartment for nonnasal and nondermal exposure, respectively. It is acknowledged that PFOA and PFOS are strongly bound to proteins in plasma such as albumin in mammals. 40 Han et al. reported that &gt; 90 % of PFOA was bound to serum albumin in rat and human blood. 40 The thermodynamic model assumes that only the free fraction of a chemical is pharmacologically active, 41 which is supported by the fact that the PBTK models based on the free fraction of PFAS usually generated the best fit of the plasma and tissue concentrations. 42 , 43 In this study, the initial value (0.09) of the free fraction was taken from Chou et al. 38 The vascular and extravascular areas are thought to be well stirred with quick equilibrium in the flow-limited model. The venous concentration of a chemical leaving a tissue is equal to its free concentration in the tissue, which is calculated as the total concentration in the tissue multiplied by the quotient of the free fraction and tissue-specific partition coefficient. Figure 1. Structures of the PBTK models for PFAS in the mouse following oral (A), nasal (B), dermal (C), and IV exposure. They were modified based on Chou and Lin 38 and Loccisano et al. 24 Note: IV, intravenous injection; K 0 C , rate of uptake from stomach into the liver, 1 / ( h × BW − 0.25 ) ; K absC , rate of absorption of chemical from intestine to liver, 1 / ( h × BW − 0.25 ) ; K bileC , bile elimination rate constant, 1 / ( h × BW − 0.25 ) ; K p , the permeability coefficients for dermis, cm/h; K t , affinity constant, ng/mL; K unabsC , rate of unabsorbed dose to appear in feces, 1 / ( h × BW − 0.25 ) ; K urineC , urine elimination rate constant, 1 / ( h × BW − 0.25 ) ; K vol , loss rate from chamber, 1/h; P DerCha , dermis-to-chamber partition coefficient, unitless; P LungA , lung-to-end exhaled breath partition coefficient, unitless; Q FilC , the fractional blood flow to filtrate, unitless; Q KC , the fractional blood flow to kidney, unitless; Q LC , the fractional blood flow to liver, unitless; Q LungC , the fractional blood flow to lung, unitless; Q pC , the alveolar ventilation rate, mL/h/g; Q RestC , the fractional blood flow to rest of body, unitless; Q SkinC , the fractional blood flow to skin, unitless; SA, exposure surface area, cm 2 ; T mc , maximal reabsorption rate, ng / h / BW 0.75 . Figure 1(A) is a schematic flowchart titled Oral with twelve steps. Step 1: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the lung has a unidirectional relationship with the lung. Step 2: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the skin has a unidirectional relationship with the skin. Step 3: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the rest of the body has a bidirectional relationship with the rest of the body. Step 4: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the liver has a bidirectional relationship with the liver. Step 5: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the kidney has a bidirectional relationship with the kidney. Step 6: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the filtrate has a unidirectional relationship with the filtrate. Step 7: Oral leads to stomach. Step 8: Stomach with the rate of uptake from the stomach into the liver leads to the liver and intestines. Step 9: Intestine with the rate of absorption of chemical from intestine to liver leads to liver, and the rate of unabsorbed dose leads to storage. Step 10: Liver with a constant bile elimination rate leads to storage. Step 11: Filtrate with maximal reabsorption rate and affinity constant lead to kidney. Step 12: Filtrate with a urine elimination rate constant, leading to urine. Figure 1(B) is a schematic flowchart titled Nasal with eleven steps. Step 1: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the lung has a bidirectional relationship with the lung. Step 2: Lung leads to the end exhaled breath with alveolar ventilation rate and lung-to-end exhaled breath partition coefficient. Step 3: Nasal leads to lung. Step 4: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the skin has a bidirectional relationship with the skin. Step 5: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the rest of the body has a bidirectional relationship with the rest of the body. Step 6: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the liver has a bidirectional relationship with the liver. Step 7: A liver with a constant rate of bile elimination leads to storage. Step 8: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the kidney has a bidirectional relationship with the kidney. Step 9: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the filtrate has a unidirectional relationship with the filtrate. Step 10: Filtrate with maximal reabsorption rate and affinity constant lead to kidney. Step 11: Filtrate at a constant rate of urine elimination. Figure 1(C) is a schematic flowchart titled Dermal with twelve steps. Step 1: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the lung has a bidirectional relationship with the lung. Step 2: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the dermis has a bidirectional relationship with the dermis. Step 3: Dermis with the permeability coefficients for dermis, exposure surface area, and dermis-to-chamber partition coefficent has a bidirectional relationship with the Chamber. Step 4: Chamber with loss rate from chamber leads to loss. Step 5: Dermal leads to chamber. Step 6: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the rest of the body has a bidirectional relationship with the rest of the body. Step 7: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the liver has a bidirectional relationship with the liver. Step 8: Liver with bile elimination rate constant leads to storage. Step 9: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the kidney has a bidirectional relationship with the kidney. Step 10: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the filtrate has a unidirectional relationship with the filtrate. Step 11: Filtrate with maximal reabsorption rate and affinity constant lead to kidney. Step 12: Filtrate at a constant rate of urine elimination. Figure 1(D) is a schematic flowchart titled intravenous injection with ten steps. Step 1: Intravenous injection lead to plasma. Step 2: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the lung has a bidirectional relationship with the lung. Step 3: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the skin has a bidirectional relationship with the skin. Step 4: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the rest of the body has a bidirectional relationship with the rest of the body. Step 5: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the liver has a bidirectional relationship with the liver. Step 6: Liver with bile elimination rate constant lead to storage. Step 7: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the kidney has a bidirectional relationship with the kidney. Step 8: Plasma with fractional blood flow to the filtrate has a unidirectional relationship with the filtrate. Step 9: Filtrate with maximal reabsorption rate and affinity constant lead to kidney. Step 10: Filtrate at a constant rate of urine elimination. The oral absorption of PFAS was described in a two-compartment gastrointestinal (GI) model. 38 After absorption, PFAS are transported directly from GI tract to the liver via the portal vein. A first-order constant K 0 (1/h) describes the uptake rate from the stomach, whereas the first-order rate constant K abs (1/h) refers to the uptake in the intestine. The mass balance differential equations (MBDE) describing oral uptake are provided as follows: (1) R ST = − K 0 × A ST − GE × A ST , (2) R SI = GE × A ST − K abs × A SI − K unabs × A SI , where R ST and R SI are the change rates of the amount of PFAS (ng/h) in the stomach and small intestine, respectively; A ST and A SI are the amount of PFAS in the stomach and small intestine (ng), respectively; GE is the gastric emptying rate (mL/h); K unabs is the rate constant of unabsorbed PFAS that appear in the feces (/h). Nasal exposure is considered as a single dose to the lung directly. 44 Output via exhalation is described by the pulmonary ventilation rate Q p (mL/h) and lung to end-exhaled breath (alveolar air) partition coefficient P Lung A (unitless). The MBDE describing nasal uptake is provided and explained below 45 : (3) R Lung = Q Lung × [ C A × Free − C Lung × ( Free / P Lung ) ] − Q p × C Lung / P Lung A , where R Lung is the change rate of the amount of PFAS (ng/h) in lung; Q Lung is the blood flow rate to lung (mL/h); C A is the PFAS concentration in plasma (ng/mL); C Lung is the concentration of PFAS in lung (ng/mL); P Lung is lung to plasma partition coefficient (unitless); and Free is the free fraction of PFAS in plasma (unitless). Continuous inhalation from air was neglected because the concentration of PFAS in the mice of the control group was extremely low. ID injection creates a chamber on the dermis surface in which the dose is administered, and then PFAS diffuse across the dermis. A two-compartment model separating chamber from the dermis was used to predict the dermal absorption of PFAS. 46 Elimination of PFAS via secreted sebum was considered. By incorporating Fick’s Law for diffusion, the MBDE for chamber is: (4) R Cha = K p × SA × ( C Der / P DerCha − C Cha ) − K vol × A Cha , where R Cha is the change rate of the amount of PFAS in the chamber (ng/h); K p is the permeability coefficient for the dermis (cm/h); SA is the exposed surface area ( cm 2 ); C Der is the concentration in the dermis (ng/mL); P DerCha is the dermis-to-chamber partition coefficient (unitless); C Cha is the concentration in the chamber (ng/mL); K vol is the loss rate from the chamber (1/h). A Cha is the amount of PFAS in the chamber (ng). The MBDE for the dermis is: (5) R Der = Q Skin × [ C A × Free − C Der × ( Free / P Der ) ] + K p × SA × ( C Epi − C Der / P DerCha ) , where R Der is the change rate of the amount of PFAS in the dermis (ng/h); Q Skin is the blood flow rate to the dermis (mL/h); P Der is the dermis-to-plasma partition coefficient (unitless). In one of our recent studies, PFAS were applied on the skin surface of the rats, and the absorption percentages of PFAS were determined (7.74%, 7.21%, and 8.30% for PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA, respectively). 31 When the dosage was multiplied by the absorption percentage obtained in that study, the model was successful to simulate the concentration of the target PFAS in the rat blood, dermis, and liver (Figure S1). To avoid overestimating the internal level due to intradermal injection, the applied dosage was corrected by the absorption percentage when simulating the pharmacokinetics of dermal exposure. The first-order rate constant ( K urine , 1/h) was used to describe the urinary excretion rate of PFAS. It has been speculated that renal resorption through transporters in the proximal tubule of the kidney is responsible for the prolonged plasma half-lives of PFAS. 47 Thus, the filtrate compartment described the saturable renal resorption with the maximal reabsorption rate ( T m , ng/h) and transporter affinity constant ( K t , ng/mL). 22 The MBDEs for the liver, kidney, and filtrate are as follows: (6) R K = Q K × [ C A × Free − C K × ( Free / P K ) ] + ( T m × C Fil ) / ( K t + C Fil ) , (7) R Fil = Q Fil × C A × Free − A Fil × K urine − ( T m × C Fil ) / ( K t + C Fil ) , where R K and R Fil are the change rates of the amount of PFAS in the kidney and filtrate, respectively (ng/h); Q K and Q Fil are the blood flow rates to the kidney and filtrate (mL/h), respectively; C K and C Fil are the concentration in the kidney and filtrate, respectively (ng/g); A Fil is the amount of PFAS in the filtrate (ng); and P K is the kidney-to-plasma partition coefficients. K abs and K 0 are only incorporated in the oral model. The MBDE for the liver is as follows: (8) R L = Q L × [ C A × Free − C L × ( Free / P L ) ] − K bile × A L + K abs × A SI + K 0 × A ST , where R L is the change rate of the amount of PFAS in the liver (ng/h); Q L is the blood flow rate to the liver (mL/h); C L is the concentration in the liver (ng/g); A L is the amount of PFAS in the liver (ng); and P L is the liver-to-plasma partition coefficient (unitless). It was estimated that ∼ 97 % of the secreted PFOS was reabsorbed from bile, 48 but this reabsorption was not included in the current model due to a lack of information regarding the relevant parameters. To decrease uncertainty of the model, the “storage” compartment was set to represent the simplified biliary pathway with the first-order biliary elimination rate ( K bile , 1/h). The MBDE for noneliminating tissues, such as lung, skin, and the rest of the body in the oral model, is as following: (9) R Nt = Q Nt × [ C A × Free − C Nt × ( Free / P Nt ) ] , where R Nt is the change rate in the amount of PFAS in these tissues (ng/h); Q Nt is the blood flow rate to them (mL/h); C Nt is the concentration in them (ng/g); and P Nt is the no-eliminating tissue-to-plasma partition coefficient. Parameterization. All physiological parameters obtained from literatures were fixed in the model calibration (Table S6). 24 , 49 – 52 The fitted chemical parameters are summarized in Table S7. The parameters of blood flows and maximal reabsorption rate were scaled as body weight ( BW ) 0.75 ; the parameters of the first-order rate constants were scaled as BW − 0.25 ; and the partition coefficients, affinity constant, and tissue volumes were scaled linearly to body weight. 53 Low- and high-level dosed groups were used to calibrate and validate the PBTK models, respectively. The models were calibrated by fitting the measured concentrations of the target compounds in the plasma, liver, kidney, lung (except nasal route), and skin (except dermal route) of the dosed mice. It was hypothesized that exposure routes did not affect the rates of metabolism and elimination of PFAS. 54 , 55 Therefore, parameters related to renal resorption, the body weight normalized maximal reabsorption rate ( T mc and K t ) and bile elimination rate constant ( K bileC ) were calibrated by the results obtained from IV ( 1 mg / kg ). Additional calibration of the urine elimination rate constant ( K urine C ) was conducted to fit the amount of PFAS eliminated through urine as shown in previous studies. 28 , 29 , 56 Then they were applied in the calibration of the PBTK models via other routes. 57 A preliminary sensitivity analysis was conducted to identify sensitive parameters followed by calibrations using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. 42 The purpose was to reduce the computing load and improve the quality of the performance. The route-specific bioavailability of PFAS was calculated by dividing the predicted area under the concentration curve (AUC) via oral, nasal, or dermal route by the AUC via IV. 58 Based on the predicted concentration-time data, the elimination half-life ( T 1 / 2 , d) was calculated as follows 59 : (10) T 1 / 2 = ln ( 2 ) / k e , (11) k e = – [ ln ( C end ) − ln ( C max ) ] / ( T end − T max ) , where k e is the first-order elimination rate (/d), C end (ng/mL), and C max (ng/mL) are the predicted concentration of PFAS at the end (day 40) and the maximum predicted concentration of PFAS in plasma, respectively. T end (d) and T max (d) is the time at the end point of prediction (40 d in this study) and time to reach the peak concentration. Model evaluation. By contrasting the predicted concentration-time kinetic profiles with the experimental results, the performance of the PBPK model was assessed. 60 If the predicted values were within a factor of two of the observed values, it was regarded as satisfactory. 60 The degree of fit between the log 10 -transformed observed and predicted values was assessed using linear regression. A local sensitivity analysis was carried out by adjusting each parameter by 1% stepwise from the original value. The normalized sensitivity coefficient (NSC) was determined to examine the impact on the area AUC of plasma ( AUC plasma ) because it reflects the relative amount of PFAS absorbed into the systemic circulation. 38 The equation to calculate NSC is 38 : (12) NSC = ( Δ r / r ) × ( p / Δ p ) , where r is the response variable; Δ r is the change in the response variable caused by 1% increase in the parameter value; p is the parameter’s original value, and Δ p is 1% of the parameter’s original value. Extrapolating from Single- to Repeated-Dose Exposure Scenario Because organisms in the environment are usually exposed to pollutants continuously, the PBTK model established from the single-dose scenario was extrapolated to a repeated-dose exposure scenario. We collected the data sets obtained from rat or mice models reported in literature (Table S8) and compared them with the results predicted by the model. The exposure scenarios, body weight, and alveolar ventilation (if necessary) of rats or mice were consistent with those in the literature. In the three oral exposure studies, the exposure duration was 7 d, 42 d, and 104 wk, respectively. 61 – 63 For nasal and dermal exposure routes, only two studies were available for model evaluation of repeated nasal ( 1 mg / m 3 PFOA, 6 h/d, 5 d/wk for 3 wk) and dermal exposure ( 20 mg / kg / d PFOA for 10 d). 30 , 64 The original exposure scenario of nasal exposure was adjusted to 953.7 μ g / kg / wk for 30 wk (when steady state was reached) derived from the body weight ( 216 g ) and alveolar ventilation rate ( 31.74 mL / h / g ) of the rat to fit our model. 30 , 49 Extrapolating from Mouse to Human Because oral intake is the main exposure route for general people and there are abundant data on human exposure to PFOS, the established oral PBTK model of PFOS was extrapolated to human assuming that all the estimated daily intake (EDI) enters the human body orally. The physiological parameters of mice were replaced with those of human (Table S9). Haug et al. determined the PFOS concentrations in the same Norway population from 1977 to 2006, which were used for model calibration (Table S10). 65 Then, the model was validated with the data set from the United States, 27 Canada, 66 – 68 and Australia populations. 69 – 71 After that, the nasal and dermal models were extrapolated to human by using the Free, K bileC , and rest of body-to-plasma partition coefficient ( P Rest ) value calibrated in the oral human model. Poothong et al. determined the EDI values of PFOS through diet and dust digestion, air inhalation, and skin absorption for general people, which were used to estimate the steady-state concentration of PFOS in human blood based on the established human PBTK models. 32 The sum of the simulated steady-state concentration of PFOS via each route was considered the total concentration of PFOS in human blood. Data Analyses All model simulations were conducted using R (version 4.1.2; R Development Core Team). The model codes were adapted from the code in a previous study. 42 The PBTK model was coded in R package “mrgsolve.” Linear regression analysis and plotting were performed with GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, Inc.). The model code is provided in the supplemental file, “Model Codes.txt.” Results Physiological Status of Mice No mortality was observed during the experiment. There was no significant difference between the exposed and control groups in the body weight and liver:body weight ratio, which suggests that no distinct significant toxic effect was observed throughout the experiment (Tables S11 and S12). The concentrations of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA in the plasma of the control group were about 2–4 orders of magnitude lower than the exposure groups (Table S13; average 4.63, 2.67, and 6.28 ng / mL , respectively), and therefore contamination from background was considered to be negligible. They were all detected in all the target tissues of the test groups, suggesting that they were absorbed into the tissues through the individual specific exposure routes. Model Evaluation Figure 2 and Figure S2 compare the predicted accumulation kinetics of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA using the individual PBTK models with the observed results for the purpose of calibration (dose at 1 mg / kg ) and validation (dose at 5 mg / kg ). The route-specific PBTK models calibrated at a dose of 1 mg / kg well simulated the concentration-time curves at a dose of 5 mg / kg (Figures S3–S14). Overall, 98.8% and 84.2% of the predicted concentrations of PFAS in the tissues dosed at 1 mg / kg and 5 mg / kg , respectively, fell within a predicted-to-observed ratio of 2:1. The predicted concentrations of the three PFAS generated from the individual models correlated with the measured ones very well ( R 2 = 0.95 – 0.98 for the dosage of 1 mg / kg and R 2 = 0.85 – 0.92 for the dosage of 5 mg / kg ). The slopes of the linear fitting equation were very close to 1 ( 1.02 ± 0.14 for the dosage of 1 mg / kg and 1.11 ± 0.17 for the dosage of 5 mg / kg , p &lt; 0.0001 ), suggesting the established models are reliable. The predicted amount of these three PFAS in urine also fit the results in previous mice studies very well (Figure S15). At the end of the simulation (40 d), the cumulative excretion of PFHxS in urine was the highest (11.7%–24.0% of the dosage), followed by PFOA and PFOS (2.28%–11.15%, and 0.694%–2.04%, respectively) (Figure S16). Figure 2. An overall evaluation of goodness of model fit for PFAS between the model-predicted and the observed concentration following 1 mg / kg oral (A), nasal (B), dermal (C), and IV (D) exposure. The solid diagonal line represents equal observed and predicted values. The dotted line indicates a predicted-to-observed ratio of &gt; 2 : 1 or &lt; 0.5 : 1 . Linear fitting equation and R 2 were estimated through the linear regression model. The corresponding numeric data was shown in Excel Table S1. Note: IV, intravenous injection. Figure 2(A) to 2(D) are graphs titled oral, nasal, dermal and intravenous injection, plotting Predicted values (nanogram per milliliter or nanogram per gram), ranging as 10 begin superscript 0 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 1 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 2 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 3 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 4 end superscript, and 10 begin superscript 5 end superscript (y-axis) across Observed values (nanogram per milliliter or nanogram per gram), ranging as 10 begin superscript 0 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 1 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 2 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 3 end superscript, 10 begin superscript 4 end superscript, and 10 begin superscript 5 end superscript (x-axis) for skin, kidney, liver, and plasma, respectively. The sensitive parameters with NSC &gt; 10 % for AUC plasma in the low-dosage groups are shown in Figure S17. Free-, body weight-, and liver-related parameters [ P L , K bileC , and fractional volume of liver ( V LC )] were sensitive parameters common to all exposure routes and all three compounds (Figure S17A and S17B). Specially, the AUC plasma of PFHxS was highly sensitive to the kidney-related parameters [ K urineC , T mc , fractional blood flow to filtrate ( Q FilC ), and the fractional volume of filtrate ( V FilC )]. The sensitivity of these parameters and Cardiac output ( Q CC ), Hematocrit (Htc), K 0 C , and P Rest were highly dose-dependent (Figures S17C and S18C). For nasal exposure, P Lung , P LungA , fractional blood flow to lung ( Q LungC ), and the alveolar ventilation rate ( Q pC ) were highly sensitive parameters to AUC plasma for all PFAS. For dermal exposure, K vol , K p , and SA were unique sensitive parameters, which only had a high influence on the AUC plasma of PFOS. Gastric and intestinal parameters ( K 0 C and K absC ) had an obvious effect on AUC plasma of PFHxS for oral exposure. Pharmacokinetics and Bioavailability of PFAS in Mice Figure 3A–C illustrates the simulated concentration-time curves of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA in the plasma, respectively. The T max of PFAS in plasma ( Figure 3D ) was the longest in the dermal exposure groups (1.42–3.46 d), followed by the oral (0.708–1.71 d) and nasal exposure groups (0.0417 d). For dermal and oral exposure, the order of T max was PFOS (3.46 d) &gt; PFHxS (1.83 d) &gt; PFOA (1.42 d), and PFOS (1.71 d) &gt; PFOA (1.33 d) &gt; PFHxS (0.710 d), respectively, which was negatively associated with the value of K p / K vol (2,104 for PFOA; 203 for PFHxS; 41.2 for PFOS) and K 0 C × K absC (2.67 for PFHxS; 2.02 for PFOA; 0.534 for PFOS), respectively. The maximum concentration ( C max ) of each PFAS in the plasma via different exposure routes was the highest for oral exposure, followed by nasal, and then dermal exposure ( Figure 3E ). Among all exposure routes, the concentration of PFHxS in the plasma was the highest, followed by PFOA and PFOS. The concentration of PFOS in the liver was the highest, followed by PFOA and PFHxS. As predicted, PFOS had the highest P L (mean 3.96), followed by PFOA and PFHxS (mean 0.993 and 0.223, respectively). PK value ranked in the same order as P L for the three PFAS. Figure 3. Simulated concentration-time curves of PFHxS (A), PFOS (B), and PFOA (C) in the plasma of mice following 1 mg / kg single oral, nasal, dermal, and IV exposure, and the time to peak ( T max ) (D), predicted maximum concentration ( C max ) (E), elimination half-life ( T 1 / 2 ) (F), and bioavailability (G) of PFAS. Linear fitting between relative C max (the ratio of oral or dermal or nasal C max to IV C max ) and bioavailability (H); the dotted line represents the 95% confidence interval. T 1 / 2 are presented as the mean value of these three routes. Error bar represents the standard deviation. Linear fitting R 2 and p -value were estimated through the linear regression model. The corresponding numeric data are shown in Excel Table S2. Note: IV, intravenous injection; PFHxS, perfluorohexane sulfonate; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid; PFOS, perfluorooctane sulfonate. Figures 3(A) to 3(C) are line graphs titled perfluorohexane sulfonate, perfluorooctane sulfonate, and perfluorooctanoic acid, plotting concentration (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 10000 in increments of 2000; 0 to 2500 in increments of 500\; and 0 to 4000 in increments of 1000 (y-axis) across Time (day), ranging from 0 to 40 in increments of 10 (x-axis) for intravenous injection, oral, nasal, and dermal, respectively. Figures 3(D), 3(E), 3(G) are bar graphs, plotting time to reach the peak concentration in plasma (day), ranging from 0.00 to 0.10 in increments of 0.02 and 1 to 5 in in unit increments; predicted maximum concentration in plasma (microgram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 10000 in increments of 2000, bioavailability (percentage), ranging from 0 to 150 in increments of 50 (y-axis) across perfluorohexane sulfonate, perfluorooctane sulfonate, and perfluorooctanoic acid (x-axis) for intravenous injection, oral, nasal, and dermal; intravenous injection, oral, nasal, and dermal; and oral, nasal, and dermal, respectively. Figure 3(F) is a bar graph, plotting elimination half-life (day), ranging from 0 to 40 in increments of 10 (y-axis) across perfluorohexane sulfonate, perfluorooctane sulfonate, and perfluorooctanoic acid (x-axis). Figure 3(H) is a line graph, plotting bioavailability (percentage), ranging from 0 to 150 in increments of 50 (y-axis) across relative predicted maximum concentration, ranging from 0.0 to 1.5 in increments of 0.5 (x-axis). PFOS had the longest T 1 / 2 (16.9–31.2 d), followed by PFHxS (11.8–23.0 d) and PFOA (8.17–10.8 d), which was positively associated with the value of T mc / K t (7.19 for PFOS, 1.38 for PFHxS, 0.305 for PFOA). Among the different exposure routes, the bioavailability of PFAS via oral exposure was the highest (73.2%–98.0%), which was followed by nasal (33.9%–66.8%) and dermal exposure (4.59%–7.80%) ( Figure 3G ). The bioavailability was positively correlated with the ratio of oral or dermal or nasal C max (relative C max ) to IV C max ( Figure 3H ; R 2 = 0.95 , p &lt; 0.0001 ). In the mice receiving joint exposure via oral, nasal, and dermal routes concomitantly, the concentrations of PFAS in the plasma, liver, and kidney on days 2, 16, and 32 were measured (triangles in Figure 4 ). Figure 4 illustrates that the measured concentrations were very close to the summed concentrations of the three single-exposure routes (squares), suggesting that there was no mutual interference between the exposure routes. Thus, a combination of the three individual models was applied to predict the joint exposure, and the prediction was in agreement with the measured results (triangles dots in Figure 4 ). Figure 4. The predicted results of combined model via multiple routes (lines). The triangles represent the concentrations ( mean ± SD ) of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA (letters A, B, and C, respectively) in plasma, liver, and kidney (numbers 1, 2, and 3, respectively) on day 2, 16, and 32 following the joint exposure ( 1 mg / kg for each route) ( n = 4 ). The squares represent the sum of the concentrations in mice following a single exposure of 1 mg / kg via oral, nasal, or dermal exposure. The corresponding numeric data are shown in Excel Table S3. Note: Con, concentration; PFHxS, perfluorohexane sulfonate; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid; PFOS, perfluorooctane sulfonate; SD, standard deviation. Figures 4(A1) to 4(A3) are line graphs titled perfluorohexane sulfonate, plasma; perfluorohexane sulfonate, liver; perfluorohexane sulfonate, kidney, plotting concentration in plasma (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 30000 in increments of 10000; concentration in the liver (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from, 0 to 8000 in increments of 2000; concentration in the kidney (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from, 0 to 1000 in increments of 200 (y-axis) across time (day), ranging from 0 to 40 in increments of 10 (x-axis) for predicted, observed, and sum, respectively. Figures 4(B1) to 4(B3) are line graphs titled perfluorooctane sulfonate, plasma; perfluorooctane sulfonate, liver; perfluorooctane sulfonate, kidney, plotting concentration in plasma (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 5000 in increments of 1000; concentration in the liver (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from, 0 to 20000 in increments of 5000; concentration in the kidney (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from, 0 to 600 in increments of 200 (x-axis) for predicted, observed, and sum, respectively. Figures 4(C1) to 4(C3) are line graphs titled perfluorooctanoic acid, plasma; perfluorooctanoic acid, liver; perfluorooctanoic acid, kidney, plotting concentration in plasma (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 15000 in increments of 5000; concentration in the liver (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from, 0 to 20000 in increments of 5000; concentration in the kidney (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from, 0 to 600 in increments of 200 (y-axis) across time (day), ranging from 0 to 40 in increments of 10 (x-axis) for predicted, observed, and sum, respectively. Prediction of the Repeated Exposure in Mouse and Extrapolation to Human For repeated oral exposure, especially for the 104-wk exposure of PFOS, all the predictions were in good agreement with the observed PFOS concentrations in both the plasma and liver of the mice dosed at 0.024, 0.098, 0.242, and 0.984 mg / kg / d ( Figure 5 ). The model also fit well with the PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA concentrations in the plasma and liver of the mice dosed at 0.023 and 0.23 mg / kg / d for 7 d orally (Figures S19 and S20) and PFHxS concentration in the rat plasma dosed at 0.3 mg / kg / d for 42 d orally (Figure S21). The modeled concentration of PFOA after repeated nasal and dermal exposure in the rat plasma agreed very well with the measured result (Figures S22 and S23). Overall, 95.0% of the mean ± SD of the measured data under the repeated oral, nasal, and dermal dose scenarios were within the range of 2 times the predicted values. Figure 5. Application of the oral PBTK model to predict PFOS concentrations in plasma and liver in rat that were exposed every day for 104 wk, followed by 1 wk of clearance. Comparisons of the modeled vs. observed PFOS concentrations ( mean ± SD ) in rat plasma and liver dosed at 0.024 (A1 and A2), 0.098 (B1 and B2), 0.242 (C1 and C2) and 0.984 mg / kg / d (D1 and D2), respectively ( n = 5 ). The experimental data (dots) are from Butenhoff et al. 63 The shaded area represents a predicted-to-observed ratio between 0.5:1 and 2:1. The corresponding numeric data are shown in Excel Table S4. Note: Con, concentration. Figures 5(A1) and 5(A2) are ribbon plus line graph, plotting concentration in plasma (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 6000 in increments of 2000 and concentration in the liver (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from, 0 to 30000 in increments of 10000 (y-axis) across time (day), ranging from 0 to 600 in increments of 200 (x-axis) for 0.024 milligram per kilogram per day, plasma and 0.024 milligram per kilogram per day, liver. Figures 5(B1) and 5(B2) are ribbon plus line graph, plotting concentration in plasma (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 25000 in increments of 5000 and concentration in the liver (nanogram per milliliter), ranging as 0e plus 00, 5e plus 04, and 1e plus 05 (y-axis) across time (day), ranging from 0 to 600 in increments of 200 (x-axis) for 0.098 milligram per kilogram per day, plasma and 0.098 milligram per kilogram per day, liver. Figures 5(C1) and 5(C2) are ribbon plus line graph, plotting concentration in plasma (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 60000 in increments of 20000 and concentration in the liver (nanogram per milliliter), ranging as 0e plus 00, 1e plus 05, 2e plus 05, and 3e plus 05 (y-axis) across time (day), ranging from 0 to 600 in increments of 200 (x-axis) for 0.242 milligram per kilogram per day, plasma and 0.242 milligram per kilogram per day, liver. Figures 5(D1) and 5(D2) are ribbon plus line graph, plotting concentration in plasma (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 250000 in increments of 50000 and concentration in the liver (nanogram per milliliter), ranging as 0e plus 00, 5e plus 05, and 1e plus 06 (y-axis) across time (day), ranging from 0 to 600 in increments of 200 (x-axis) for 0.984 milligram per kilogram per day, plasma and 0.984 milligram per kilogram per day, liver. The results indicate that the human model performed very well in prediction of the PFOS concentration in human blood ( Figure 6 ). The Free, K bileC , and P Rest in the human PBTK model were much lower than that in the mouse model (Table S10). The simulated PFOS concentration in human plasma via separate oral, nasal, and dermal exposure is shown in Figure S24. Oral intake was estimated to make the most contribution to the internal level of PFOS in the human model. It is worth noting that although the daily intake of PFOS through the nasal route ( 3.5 pg / kg / d ) was 18.4 times that of dermal route ( 0.19 pg / kg / d ), the contribution of the nasal route to the internal level was comparable to that of dermal route (0.0235% and 0.0355%, respectively) (Table S14). Figure 6. Model calibration (Norway 65 ) and verification (Australia, 69 – 71 Canada, 66 – 68 and United States 27 ) results for human model of PFOS. It is assumed that all the estimated daily intake entered into the human body through oral route. The shaded area represents a predicted-to-observed ratio between 0.5:1 and 2:1. The corresponding numeric data are shown in Excel Table S5. Note: PFOS, perfluorooctane sulfonate; US, United States. Figure 6 is a ribbon plus line graph, plotting concentration (nanogram per milliliter), ranging from 0 to 60 in increments of 20 (y-axis) across year, ranging from 1980 to 2020 in increments of 10 years (x-axis) for Australia, Canada, United States, and Norway. Discussion In this study, mice were exposed to PFAS via oral, nasal, dermal exposure routes singly or jointly. The route-specific PBTK models were established to investigate the route-specific effects on the pharmacokinetics of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA. For the first time to our knowledge, nasal and dermal routes were included in the PBTK models of PFAS. These PBTK models successfully simulated the pharmacokinetics of PFAS in mice after low- and high-level exposures. The results suggest that exposure routes significantly affect the uptake of PFAS in mice, resulting in the highest bioavailability of PFAS after oral exposure, followed by nasal and dermal exposure. The combined model of the three exposure routes performed well to describe the accumulation of PFAS via concurrent multiple-route exposure, which happens in realistic environments. The models were also powerful to predict the concentrations of PFAS in the plasma and various tissues of rodents and humans under repeated exposure in long-term situations. Route-Specific PBTK Model for PFAS As shown in Figures 2 and Figure S2, the simulated data obtained from the four individual PBTK models correlated with the observed data very well, which meet the World Health Organization (WHO) model precision criteria, 60 confirming that the established route-specific PBTK models were capable of simulating the single-dose exposure of PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA in mice. Deviations between the predicted and measured values at a few time points might be attributed to the dose-dependent pharmacokinetic process of PFAS in vivo and changes in the physiological parameters of the mice over time. 42 The models were used to predict the PFAS concentrations in the serum of mice dosed at 1 mg / kg by Lou et al., 72 Chang et al., 28 and Sundstrom et al. 29 The model well predicted the T max , though it slightly underestimated the observed concentrations in serum (Figure S25). This slight underestimation might be attributed to the mixed PFAS exposure used in this study, leading to competition among the PFAS with different carbon chain lengths and structures when binding to the limited protein cavity sites. 73 Similarly, the weaker binding affinity of PFOA to liver fatty acid binding protein ( K d -LP = 197 ± 13 ) than PFOS ( K d -LP = 81 ± 7 ) may account for its lower PL under mixed PFAS exposure in this study than that exposed to PFOA alone in previous studies. 72 , 74 , 75 AUC plasma is a dose-dependent parameter. BW and Free were the most sensitive parameters for AUC plasma of target PFAS and determined the dose and the amount absorbed into the systemic circulation, respectively. The estimated Free ( &lt; 10 % ) was comparable to the value obtained in previous studies. 28 , 38 , 72 In the present study, all the PFAS were sensitive to the distribution and excretion process through the liver. Previous PBTK models were mainly applied to PFOS, which also found that Free, K bileC , and P L were key parameters affecting the PFOS concentrations in plasma and tissues in rodents. 42 Renal excretion and reabsorption played a decisive role for PFHxS, which might be because PFHxS prefers to partition in plasma. 29 This finding suggests that the models were effective in describing the partition behaviors of PFAS with different physicochemical properties. Differences in Pharmacokinetics and Bioavailability of PFAS A distinct hysteretic effect in the plasma was observed in the dermal exposure group ( Figure 3A–C ), which had also been observed for other organic pollutants such as chlorpyrifos (CPF), polybrominated diphenyl ethers, bisphenol A, and methyl tertiary-butyl ether. 76 – 79 For example, it was modeled to take 3.79 d for PFOS in the chamber to decrease below 1% of the given dose after dermal exposure, whereas it took only 0.75 and 0.04 d in the stomach and lung after oral and nasal exposure, respectively (Figure S26). This finding suggests that the dermis acts as a barrier to depress the penetration of PFAS; thus, it took a prolonged period for them to be absorbed into the bloodstream. Continuously slow release of contaminants at the sites of dermal absorption could potentially lead to drastically different biological responses than would be expected following other routes. For example, subcutaneous administration of CPF in the rats greatly prolonged inhibition of cholinesterase activity in the brain relative to oral exposure. 80 It was reported that the rate at which pollutants were absorbed through the skin into the blood was limited by the penetration rate. 81 After percutaneous exposure, the T max of PFOS in plasma was greater than that of PFOA, which may be attributed to the weaker permeability and lower volatility of PFOS ( K p = 1.33 × 10 − 5 cm / h , K vol = 3.23 × 10 − 7 / h ) than PFOA ( K p = 1.47 × 10 − 3 cm / h , K vol = 6.99 × 10 − 7 / h ). PFOS is more hydrophobic and has a larger molecular volume; thus, it was more difficult to pass through the water-rich dermis containing living cells. 82 The T max of PFAS in blood was the highest after nasal exposure (0.96 h), which was influenced by the physiological structure of the nasal cavity. The olfactory epithelium comprises almost 50% of the total nasal surface area, which would promote the delivery of PFAS to the olfactory bulb, 83 and the abundant capillaries of alveolar epithelial cells expedite the rapid transfer of compounds to blood. 84 In addition, anion surfactants were confirmed to be able to promote the nasal absorption of a compound by changing the membrane potential of the mucosa and damaging the close connection between epithelial cells. 85 PFAS as anionic surfactants may also be absorbed by the nasal cavity rapidly through these mechanisms. It was modeled that nasal absorption was rapid for many hydrophobic organic pollutants, such as naphthalene, which was independent of storage or metabolism in lung. 86 However, this model does not represent absorption of PFAS through the nasal mucosa and upper airways, which may underestimate the absorption rate and proportion of PFAS. The elimination rate of PFOA was higher than that of PFOS and PFHxS ( Figure 3F ). The predicted T 1 / 2 was close to that reported in previous studies using mouse models (30.5–42.8 d for PFOS, 24.9–26.8 d for PFHxS, and 14.7–24.1 for PFOA) and followed the same order in male rats (7.46–82 d for PFOS, 15.9–28.7 d for PFHxS, 1.83–13.4 for PFOA). 27 , 72 It was predicted that renal reabsorption played an important role in their elimination because the T 1 / 2 was associated with T mc / K t for these three PFAS. It was reported that PFAS were excreted by organic anion transporters (Oat1 and Oat3) and reabsorbed by an organic anion transporting polypeptide (Oatp1a1) in the rats. 87 Therefore, the substance-specific reabsorption of PFAS may be related to the different binding abilities with the renal transport proteins. The modeled results showed that among the three exposure routes, the bioavailability of PFAS decreased following the order of oral &gt; nasal &gt; dermal route. A similar order was observed for 2,2′,4,4′-tetrabromodiphenyl ether. 76 The route-specific C max is a key factor in determining the AUC and therefore bioavailability ( Figure 3H ). The highest bioavailability via oral exposure indicated that GI was most efficient of the three routes in absorption of PFAS accompanied by the increased proportions in the blood and tissues (Figures S26A, S27A, and S28A). In comparison with oral exposure, PFAS absorbed via nasal exposure might be subjected to exhalation clearance, thus reducing the final bioavailability of PFAS via this route. Despite the low volatility of PFAS due to their ionic nature, the model predicted that 52.6%, 68.9%, and 38.6% of single-dose PFHxS, PFOS, and PFOA, respectively, were excreted by exhalation after 40 d, suggesting that perfluorosulfonate acids (PFSA) had higher exhalation rate than their carboxylic acids (PFCA) counterparts (Figures S26B, S27B, and S28B). During exhalation, a large number of bioaerosol particles with large specific surface areas are produced. 88 PFSA were shown to have strong binding affinities with bioaerosol particles, promoting their exhalation and reduced the overall bioavailability. 89 A transport carrier such as this is absent in the dermal exposure 90 ; thus, the predicted loss of PFAS through secreted sebum was relatively low at the end of dermal exposure, which was 12.6% and 2.70% for PFOS and PFHxS, respectively, and PFOA was not eliminated in this way. Combining these results, PFAS due to dermal exposure displayed the lowest bioavailability among the three routes because of their interception by the epidermis. It was reported that hydrophobic compounds are directly delivered into the lipid or protein pool of tissues after oral exposure in a way similar to IV injection, where binding to proteins depresses their removal. 84 However, for nasal and dermal exposure, more PFAS exist in free form, and their absorption is mainly via passive diffusion driven by the concentration gradient, favoring interception within the skin layers or exhalation. 84 As for the joint exposure via oral, nasal, and dermal pathways simultaneously, for the first time to our knowledge, we report that there was no synergy or antagonism on the accumulation of PFAS in the tissues among different exposure routes. This finding allowed us to evaluate the relative contribution of each route to the internal doses of PFAS. The combined model was capable of predicting the joint exposure results successfully, thus providing a powerful platform to predict the internal body burdens of PFAS due to concomitant multiroute exposure. Evaluation of the Repeated Exposure of PFAS In general, the models successfully simulated a majority of the observed data derived from short-, medium-, and long-term repeated dose scenarios via different exposure routes. For the repeated oral and nasal exposures, there was a relatively large error between the predicted and observed values at a few time points, which might result from dynamic changes in physiological parameters and concentration dependence of pharmacokinetics. For the case of 104-wk daily oral exposure followed by 1 wk of clearance, the model underestimated the PFOS concentrations in the rat plasma or liver at week 14, whereas it overestimated at week 105 ( Figure 5 ). At the early stage (week 14) following PFOS exposure, Butenhoff et al. 63 demonstrated that rats were in a healthy physiological state, and thus the gastrointestinal absorption capacity might be stronger than predicted. At 105 wk after exposure, Butenhoff et al. 63 observed significant toxic effects, such as hepatomegaly, and increased excretion of PFOS resulting from the exacerbation of chronic progressive nephritis. In addition, Butenhoff et al. 63 observed that the decrease in food intake for the rat at later exposure stage also contributed to the overestimation. The model successfully predicted the concentration of PFOA in the rat plasma after repeated nasal exposure, whereas it overestimated the time to reach equilibrium (Figure S22). This overestimation may be due to the uncertainty in the values of physiological parameters such as alveolar ventilation and the body weight of the rats. In comparison with the mice PBTK models, much lower Free, K bileC , and P Rest values calibrated in the human models well explains the much longer half-life of PFOS in humans reported previously (3.3–27 y). 27 The difference between the route-specific external and internal exposures suggest that the relative contribution to the internal exposure levels is relevant to the exposure routes. For people who are exposed to PFAS through the dermal route frequently, considering the absorption efficiency of PFAS would generate a more accurate assessment of exposure risk. Although the PBTK model here can be applied to humans, more experiment data are necessary to optimize the human PBTK model and identify the differences in the route-specific absorption processes between human and mice. For example, studies have shown that human skin is considered to be less permeable than mouse skin. 91 The airways of mice are directly connected to the alveoli, whereas additional respiratory bronchioles are present in humans, 92 which may prolong the transition time in the respiratory airways. In addition, the characteristics of binding to proteins, such as the number of binding sites, dissociation constants, and a time-dependent description of the Free, need to be characterized in detail. 22 , 24 In conclusion, this study explored the oral, nasal, and dermal exposure of PFAS simultaneously and clarified the route-specific pharmacokinetics of PFAS in mice. Based on the experimental results, route-specific PBTK models were established for, to our knowledge, the first time to predict the concentrations of PFAS in plasma and tissues following single or joint exposure as well as long-term repeated-dose scenarios. Oral exposure exhibited the highest bioavailability, likely due to a quick and effective absorption. However, dermal and nasal exposures exhibited lower PFAS bioavailability, perhaps due to a distinct hysteresis effect in dermal exposure and clearance via exhalation following nasal exposure. The model was capable of predicting long-term repeated exposure in mice, which was further extrapolated to humans. For people with high nasal and dermal exposure to PFAS, such as firefighters and infants, the contribution of nasal and dermal exposure cannot be excluded from the perspective of long-term exposure. The results improve our understanding of the impacts of exposure routes on ADME kinetics of PFAS in rodents and humans. More studies on nasal and dermal exposure to PFAS are urgently needed to reduce parameter uncertainty. The model would be improved if a full description of the variance in the parameters over time is incorporated. Finally, it is necessary to consider the influence mechanisms of these exposure routes, such as the parameterization related to transmembrane transport, enterohepatic circulation, and protein binding. Supplementary Material Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 41991313, 22111530176), Ministry of Science and Technology (2022YFC3703202, 2019YFC1804203), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Nankai University, the 111 program of Ministry of Education, China (T2017002), and Chinese University Scientific Fund (No. 2452021103). References 1. Giesy JP, Kannan K. 2002. Perfluorochemical surfactants in the environment. Environ Sci Technol
36(7):146A–152A, PMID: , 10.1021/es022253t. 2. Joerss H, Apel C, Ebinghaus R. 2019. Emerging per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in surface water and sediment of the North and Baltic Seas. Sci Total Environ
686:360–369, PMID: , 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.05.363. 3. Zeng Z, Song B, Xiao R, Zeng G, Gong J, Chen M, et al. 2019. Assessing the human health risks of perfluorooctane sulfonate by in vivo and in vitro studies. Environ Int
126:598–610, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2019.03.002. 4. Ateia M, Maroli A, Tharayil N, Karanfil T. 2019. The overlooked short- and ultrashort-chain poly- and perfluorinated substances: a review. Chemosphere
220:866–882, PMID: , 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.12.186. 5. Li Y, Fletcher T, Mucs D, Scott K, Lindh CH, Tallving P, et al. 2018. Half-lives of PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA after end of exposure to contaminated drinking water. Occup Environ Med
75(1):46–51, PMID: , 10.1136/oemed-2017-104651. 6. Bao W-W, Qian Z, Geiger SD, Liu E, Liu Y, Wang S-Q, et al. 2017. Gender-specific associations between serum isomers of perfluoroalkyl substances and blood pressure among Chinese: isomers of C8 health project in China. Sci Total Environ
607-608:1304–1312, PMID: , 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.07.124. 7. Buser MC, Scinicariello F. 2016. Perfluoroalkyl substances and food allergies in adolescents. Environ Int
88:74–79, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2015.12.020. 8. UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2021. Perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (PFHxS), its salts and PFHxS-related compounds. http://chm.pops.int/Portals/0/download.aspx?d=UNEP-POPS-POPRC.15-POPRC-15-1.English.pdf [accessed 24 November 2023]. 9. Ragnarsdóttir O, Abdallah MA-E, Harrad S. 2022. Dermal uptake: an important pathway of human exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances?
Environ Pollut
307:119478, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envpol.2022.119478. 10. Zhang T, Sun HW, Wu Q, Zhang XZ, Yun SH, Kannan K. 2010. Perfluorochemicals in meat, eggs and indoor dust in China: assessment of sources and pathways of human exposure to perfluorochemicals. Environ Sci Technol
44(9):3572–3579, PMID: , 10.1021/es1000159. 11. Björklund JA, Thuresson K, de Wit CA. 2009. Perfluoroalkyl compounds (PFCs) in indoor dust: concentrations, human exposure estimates, and sources. Environ Sci Technol
43(7):2276–2281, PMID: , 10.1021/es803201a. 12. Muensterman DJ, Cahuas L, Titaley IA, Schmokel C, De la Cruz FB, Barlaz MA, et al. 2022. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in facemasks: potential source of human exposure to PFAS with implications for disposal to landfills. Environ Sci Technol Lett
9(4):320–326, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.estlett.2c00019. 13. Whitehead HD, Venier M, Wu Y, Eastman E, Urbanik S, Diamond ML, et al. 2021. Fluorinated compounds in North American cosmetics. Environ Sci Technol Lett
8(7):538–544, 10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00240. 14. Harrad S, de Wit CA, Abdallah MA-E, Bergh C, Björklund JA, Covaci A, et al. 2010. Indoor contamination with hexabromocyclododecanes, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, and perfluoroalkyl compounds: an important exposure pathway for people?
Environ Sci Technol
44(9):3221–3231, PMID: , 10.1021/es903476t. 15. Weihe P, Kato K, Calafat AM, Nielsen F, Wanigatunga AA, Needham LL, et al. 2008. Serum concentrations of polyfluoroalkyl compounds in Faroese whale meat consumers. Environ Sci Technol
42(16):6291–6295, PMID: , 10.1021/es800695m. 16. Zhou Z, Shi Y, Vestergren R, Wang T, Liang Y, Cai Y. 2014. Highly elevated serum concentrations of perfluoroalkyl substances in fishery employees from Tangxun lake, China. Environ Sci Technol
48(7):3864–3874, PMID: , 10.1021/es4057467. 17. Kim D-H, Lee J-H, Oh J-E. 2019. Assessment of individual-based perfluoroalkyl substances exposure by multiple human exposure sources. J Hazard Mater
365:26–33, PMID: , 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.10.066. 18. Dobraca D, Israel L, McNeel S, Voss R, Wang M, Gajek R, et al. 2015. Biomonitoring in California firefighters: metals and perfluorinated chemicals. J Occup Environ Med
57(1):88–97, PMID: , 10.1097/JOM.0000000000000307. 19. Sager JE, Yu J, Ragueneau-Majlessi I, Isoherranen N. 2015. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling and simulation approaches: a systematic review of published models, applications, and model verification. Drug Metab Dispos
43(11):1823–1837, PMID: , 10.1124/dmd.115.065920. 20. Schrenk D, Bignami M, Bodin L, Chipman JK, del Mazo J, Grasl-Kraupp B, et al. 2020. Risk to human health related to the presence of perfluoroalkyl substances in food. EFSA J
18(9):e06223, PMID: , 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.6223. 21. Fàbrega F, Kumar V, Schuhmacher M, Domingo JL, Nadal M. 2014. PBPK modeling for PFOS and PFOA: validation with human experimental data. Toxicol Lett
230(2):244–251, PMID: , 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.01.007. 22. Loccisano AE, Campbell JL, Andersen ME, Clewell HJ. 2011. Evaluation and prediction of pharmacokinetics of PFOA and PFOS in the monkey and human using a PBPK model. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol
59(1):157–175, PMID: , 10.1016/j.yrtph.2010.12.004. 23. Fabrega F, Nadal M, Schuhmacher M, Domingo JL, Kumar V. 2016. Influence of the uncertainty in the validation of PBPK models: a case-study for PFOS and PFOA. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol
77:230–239, PMID: , 10.1016/j.yrtph.2016.03.009. 24. Loccisano AE, Campbell JL, Butenhoff JL, Andersen ME, Clewell HJ. 2012. Comparison and evaluation of pharmacokinetics of PFOA and PFOS in the adult rat using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model. Reprod Toxicol
33(4):452–467, PMID: , 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.04.006. 25. Li K, Li C, Yu NY, Juhasz AL, Cui XY, Ma LQ. 2015. In vivo bioavailability and in vitro bioaccessibility of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in food matrices: correlation analysis and method development. Environ Sci Technol
49(1):150–158, PMID: , 10.1021/es505075z. 26. Chen Y, Juhasz A, Li H, Li C, Ma LQ, Cui X. 2020. The influence of food on the in vivo bioavailability of DDT and its metabolites in soil. Environ Sci Technol
54(8):5003–5010, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.9b06697. 27. ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2021. Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp200.pdf [accessed 24 November 2023]. 28. Chang S-C, Noker PE, Gorman GS, Gibson SJ, Hart JA, Ehresman DJ, et al. 2012. Comparative pharmacokinetics of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) in rats, mice, and monkeys. Reprod Toxicol
33(4):428–440, PMID: , 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.07.002. 29. Sundström M, Chang S-C, Noker PE, Gorman GS, Hart JA, Ehresman DJ, et al. 2012. Comparative pharmacokinetics of perfluorohexanesulfonate (PFHxS) in rats, mice, and monkeys. Reprod Toxicol
33(4):441–451, PMID: , 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.07.004. 30. Hinderliter PM, DeLorme MP, Kennedy GL. 2006. Perfluorooctanoic acid: relationship between repeated inhalation exposures and plasma PFOA concentration in the rat. Toxicology
222(1–2):80–85, PMID: , 10.1016/j.tox.2006.01.029. 31. Chen Q, Yi S, Ye Q, Zhu Y, Zhong W, Zhu L. 2022. Insights into the dermal absorption, deposition and elimination of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances in rat: the importance of skin exposure. Environ Sci Technol
56(23):16975–16984, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.2c03181. 32. Poothong S, Papadopoulou E, Padilla-Sánchez JA, Thomsen C, Haug LS. 2020. Multiple pathways of human exposure to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs): from external exposure to human blood. Environ Int
134:105244, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2019.105244. 33. Strynar MJ, Lindstrom AB. 2008. Perfluorinated compounds in house dust from Ohio and North Carolina, USA. Environ Sci Technol
42(10):3751–3756, PMID: , 10.1021/es7032058. 34. Morton DB, Jennings M, Buckwell A, Ewbank R, Godfrey C, Holgate B, et al. 2001. Refining procedures for the administration of substances. Lab Anim
35(1):1–41, PMID: , 10.1258/0023677011911345. 35. Diehl K-H, Hull R, Morton D, Pfister R, Rabemampianina Y, Smith D, et al. 2001. A good practice guide to the administration of substances and removal of blood, including routes and volumes. J Appl Toxicol
21(1):15–23, PMID: , 10.1002/jat.727. 36. Turner PV, Brabb T, Pekow C, Vasbinder MA. 2011. Administration of substances to laboratory animals: routes of administration and factors to consider. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci
50(5):600–613, PMID: . 37. Hansen KJ, Clemen LA, Ellefson ME, Johnson HO. 2001. Compound-specific, quantitative characterization of organic: fluorochemicals in biological matrices. Environ Sci Technol
35(4):766–770, PMID: , 10.1021/es001489z. 38. Chou WC, Lin ZM. 2019. Bayesian evaluation of a physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) to characterize the interspecies uncertainty between mice, rats, monkeys, and humans: development and performance verification. Environ Int
129:408–422, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2019.03.058. 39. Ruark C. 2020. Chapter 6 - Physiologically based pharmacokinetic model: distribution processes. In: Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) Modeling. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, 139–160. 10.1016/B978-0-12-818596-4.00006-0. 40. Han X, Snow TA, Kemper RA, Jepson GW. 2003. Binding of perfluorooctanoic acid to rat and human plasma proteins. Chem Res Toxicol
16(6):775–781, PMID: , 10.1021/tx034005w. 41. Knutsen HK, Alexander J, Barregård L, Bignami M, Brüschweiler B, Ceccatelli S, et al. 2018. Risk to human health related to the presence of perfluorooctane sulfonic acid and perfluorooctanoic acid in food. EFSA J
16(12):e05194, PMID: , 10.2903/j.efsa.2018.5194. 42. Chou WC, Lin ZM. 2021. Development of a gestational and lactational physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) in rats and humans and its implications in the derivation of health-based toxicity values. Environ Health Perspect
129(3):37004, PMID: , 10.1289/EHP7671. 43. Bernstein AS, Kapraun DF, Schlosser PM. 2021. A model template approach for rapid evaluation and application of physiologically based pharmacokinetic models for use in human health risk assessments: a case study on per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances. Toxicol Sci
182(2):215–228, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfab063. 44. Yang Y, Xu X, Georgopoulos PG. 2010. A Bayesian population PBPK model for multiroute chloroform exposure. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol
20(4):326–341, PMID: , 10.1038/jes.2009.29. 45. Fisher JW, Gearhart JM, Campbell JL, Mehta D. 2020. Chapter 5 - Chemical absorption and writing code for portals of entry. In: Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) Modeling. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, 127–138. 10.1016/B978-0-12-818596-4.00005-9. 46. Kim D, Nylander-French LA. 2009. Physiologically based toxicokinetic models and their application in human exposure and internal dose assessment. EXS
99:37–55, PMID: , 10.1007/978-3-7643-8336-7_2. 47. Yang C-H, Glover KP, Han X. 2010. Characterization of cellular uptake of perfluorooctanoate via organic anion-transporting polypeptide 1A2, organic anion transporter 4, and urate transporter 1 for their potential roles in mediating human renal reabsorption of perfluorocarboxylates. Toxicol Sci
117(2):294–302, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfq219. 48. Cao H, Zhou Z, Hu Z, Wei C, Li J, Wang L, et al. 2022. Effect of enterohepatic circulation on the accumulation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances: evidence from experimental and computational studies. Environ Sci Technol
56(5):3214–3224, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.1c07176. 49. Brown RP, Delp MD, Lindstedt SL, Rhomberg LR, Beliles RP. 1997. Physiological parameter values for physiologically based pharmacokinetic models. Toxicol Ind Health
13(4):407–484, PMID: , 10.1177/074823379701300401. 50. Hejtmancik MR, Ryan MJ, Toft JD, Persing RL, Kurtz PJ, Chhabra RS. 2002. Hematological effects in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice during the 13–week gavage toxicity study of methylene blue trihydrate. Toxicol Sci
65(1):126–134, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/65.1.126. 51. Worley RR, Yang X, Fisher J. 2017. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling of human exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid suggests historical non drinking-water exposures are important for predicting current serum concentrations. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
330:9–21, PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2017.07.001. 52. Yang X, Doerge DR, Teeguarden JG, Fisher JW. 2015. Development of a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model for assessment of human exposure to bisphenol A. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
289(3):442–456, PMID: , 10.1016/j.taap.2015.10.016. 53. Campbell JL Jr., Clewell RA, Gentry PR, Andersen ME, Clewell HJ 3rd. 2012. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic/toxicokinetic modeling. Methods Mol Biol
929:439–499, PMID: , 10.1007/978-1-62703-050-2_18. 54. Ohmori K, Kudo N, Katayama K, Kawashima Y. 2003. Comparison of the toxicokinetics between perfluorocarboxylic acids with different carbon chain length. Toxicology
184(2–3):135–140, PMID: , 10.1016/s0300-483x(02)00573-5. 55. Chang S-C, Das K, Ehresman DJ, Ellefson ME, Gorman GS, Hart JA, et al. 2008. Comparative pharmacokinetics of perfluorobutyrate in rats, mice, monkeys, and humans and relevance to human exposure via drinking water. Toxicol Sci
104(1):40–53, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfn057. 56. Hundley SG, Sarrif AM, Kennedy GL. 2006. Absorption, distribution, and excretion of ammonium perfluorooctanoate (APFO) after oral administration to various species. Drug Chem Toxicol
29(2):137–145, PMID: , 10.1080/01480540600561361. 57. Kwon M, Park JB, Kwon M, Song J, Yeo CS, Bae SH. 2021. Pharmacokinetics of 2-phenoxyethanol and its major metabolite, phenoxyacetic acid, after dermal and inhaled routes of exposure: application to development PBPK model in rats. Arch Toxicol
95(6):2019–2036, PMID: , 10.1007/s00204-021-03041-z. 58. Dzierlenga AL, Robinson VG, Waidyanatha S, DeVito MJ, Eifrid MA, Gibbs ST, et al. 2020. Toxicokinetics of perfluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA), perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA) in male and female Hsd: Sprague Dawley SD rats following intravenous or gavage administration. Xenobiotica
50(6):722–732, PMID: , 10.1080/00498254.2019.1683776. 59. Cheng W, Ng CA. 2021. Bayesian refinement of the permeability-limited physiologically based pharmacokinetic model for perfluorooctanoic acid in male rats. Chem Res Toxicol
34(11):2298–2308, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00193. 60. WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. Characterization and Application of Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Models in Risk Assessment. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241500906 [accessed 24 November 2023]. 61. Zhu Y, Jia Y, Wang X, Yi S, Li Y, Zhong W, et al. 2022. Mechanisms underlying the impacts of lipids on the diverse bioavailability of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in foods. Environ Sci Technol
56(6):3613–3622, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.1c06461. 62. Butenhoff JL, Chang S-C, Ehresman DJ, York RG. 2009. Evaluation of potential reproductive and developmental toxicity of potassium perfluorohexanesulfonate in Sprague Dawley rats. Reprod Toxicol
27(3–4):331–341, PMID: , 10.1016/j.reprotox.2009.01.004. 63. Butenhoff JL, Chang S-C, Olsen GW, Thomford PJ. 2012. Chronic dietary toxicity and carcinogenicity study with potassium perfluorooctanesulfonate in Sprague Dawley rats. Toxicology
293(1–3):1–15, PMID: , 10.1016/j.tox.2012.01.003. 64. Kennedy GL. 1985. Dermal toxicity of ammonium perfluorooctanoate. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
81(2):348–355, PMID: , 10.1016/0041-008x(85)90172-3. 65. Haug LS, Thomsen C, Becher G. 2009. Time trends and the influence of age and gender on serum concentrations of perfluorinated compounds in archived human samples. Environ Sci Technol
43(6):2131–2136, PMID: , 10.1021/es802827u. 66. Pollock T, Karthikeyan S, Walker M, Werry K, St-Amand A. 2021. Trends in environmental chemical concentrations in the Canadian population: biomonitoring data from the Canadian Health Measures Survey 2007–2017. Environ Int
155:106678, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2021.106678. 67. Haines DA, Saravanabhavan G, Werry K, Khoury C. 2017. An overview of human biomonitoring of environmental chemicals in the Canadian Health Measures Survey: 2007–2019. Int J Hyg Environ Health
220(2 pt A):13–28, PMID: , 10.1016/j.ijheh.2016.08.002. 68. Dallaire R, Ayotte P, Pereg D, Déry S, Dumas P, Langlois É, et al. 2009. Determinants of plasma concentrations of perfluorooctanesulfonate and brominated organic compounds in Nunavik Inuit adults (Canada). Environ Sci Technol
43(13):5130–5136, PMID: , 10.1021/es9001604. 69. Toms LML, Bräunig J, Vijayasarathy S, Phillips S, Hobson P, Aylward LL, et al. 2019. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in Australia: current levels and estimated population reference values for selected compounds. Int J Hyg Environ Health
222(3):387–394, PMID: , 10.1016/j.ijheh.2019.03.004. 70. Eriksson U, Mueller JF, Toms L-ML, Hobson P, Kärrman A. 2017. Temporal trends of PFSAs, PFCAs and selected precursors in Australian serum from 2002 to 2013. Environ Pollut
220(pt A):168–177, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.09.036. 71. Toms LML, Thompson J, Rotander A, Hobson P, Calafat AM, Kato K, et al. 2014. Decline in perfluorooctane sulfonate and perfluorooctanoate serum concentrations in an Australian population from 2002 to 2011. Environ Int
71:74–80, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envint.2014.05.019. 72. Lou I, Wambaugh JF, Lau C, Hanson RG, Lindstrom AB, Strynar MJ, et al. 2009. Modeling single and repeated dose pharmacokinetics of PFOA in mice. Toxicol Sci
107(2):331–341, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfn234. 73. Zhang Q, Zhang Y, Hu D, Wen W, Xia X. 2022. An unexpected synergistic toxicity caused by competitive bioconcentration of perfluoroalkyl acid mixtures to daphnia magna: further promoted by elevated temperature. Environ Pollut
315:120336, PMID: , 10.1016/j.envpol.2022.120336. 74. Gao K, Zhuang T, Liu X, Fu J, Zhang J, Fu J, et al. 2019. Prenatal exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) and association between the placental transfer efficiencies and dissociation constant of serum proteins–PFAS complexes. Environ Sci Technol
53(11):6529–6538, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.9b00715. 75. Fujii Y, Niisoe T, Harada KH, Uemoto S, Ogura Y, Takenaka K, et al. 2015. Toxicokinetics of perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids with different carbon chain lengths in mice and humans. J Occup Health
57(1):1–12, PMID: , 10.1539/joh.14-0136-OA. 76. Staskal DF, Diliberto JJ, DeVito MJ, Birnbaum LS. 2005. Toxicokinetics of BDE 47 in female mice: effect of dose, route of exposure, and time. Toxicol Sci
83(2):215–223, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfi018. 77. Poet TS, Timchalk C, Hotchkiss JA, Bartels MJ. 2014. Chlorpyrifos PBPK/PD model for multiple routes of exposure. Xenobiotica
44(10):868–881, PMID: , 10.3109/00498254.2014.918295. 78. Karrer C, Roiss T, von Goetz N, Gramec Skledar D, Peterlin Mašič L, Hungerbühler K. 2018. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling of the bisphenols BPA, BPS, BPF, and BPAF with new experimental metabolic parameters: comparing the pharmacokinetic behavior of BPA with its substitutes. Environ Health Perspect
126(7):077002, PMID: , 10.1289/EHP2739. 79. Kim D, Andersen ME, Pleil JD, Nylander-French LA, Prah JD. 2007. Refined PBPK model of aggregate exposure to methyl tertiary-butyl ether. Toxicol Lett
169(3):222–235, PMID: , 10.1016/j.toxlet.2007.01.008. 80. Smith JN, Campbell JA, Busby-Hjerpe AL, Lee S, Poet TS, Barr DB, et al. 2009. Comparative chlorpyrifos pharmacokinetics via multiple routes of exposure and vehicles of administration in the adult rat. Toxicology
261(1–2):47–58, PMID: , 10.1016/j.tox.2009.04.041. 81. Kapraun DF, Schlosser PM, Nylander-French LA, Kim D, Yost EE, Druwe IL. 2020. A physiologically based pharmacokinetic model for naphthalene with inhalation and skin routes of exposure. Toxicol Sci
177(2):377–391, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfaa117. 82. Abdallah MA-E, Pawar G, Harrad S. 2015. Effect of bromine substitution on human dermal absorption of polybrominated diphenyl ethers. Environ Sci Technol
49(18):10976–10983, PMID: , 10.1021/acs.est.5b03904. 83. Schroeter JD, Nong A, Yoon M, Taylor MD, Dorman DC, Andersen ME, et al. 2011. Analysis of manganese tracer kinetics and target tissue dosimetry in monkeys and humans with multi-route physiologically based pharmacokinetic models. Toxicol Sci
120(2):481–498, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfq389. 84. Sarangapani R, Teeguarden J, Andersen ME, Reitz RH, Plotzke KP. 2003. Route-specific differences in distribution characteristics of octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane in rats: analysis using PBPK models. Toxicol Sci
71(1):41–52, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/71.1.41. 85. Chavanpatil MD, Vavia PR. 2004. The influence of absorption enhancers on nasal absorption of acyclovir. Eur J Pharm Biopharm
57(3):483–487, PMID: , 10.1016/j.ejpb.2004.01.001. 86. Kim D, Andersen ME, Chao YC, Egeghy PP, Rappaport SM, Nylander-French LA. 2007. PBTK modeling demonstrates contribution of dermal and inhalation exposure components to end-exhaled breath concentrations of naphthalene. Environ Health Perspect
115(6):894–901, PMID: , 10.1289/ehp.9778. 87. Weaver YM, Ehresman DJ, Butenhoff JL, Hagenbuch B. 2010. Roles of rat renal organic anion transporters in transporting perfluorinated carboxylates with different chain lengths. Toxicol Sci
113(2):305–314, PMID: , 10.1093/toxsci/kfp275. 88. Asadi S, Wexler AS, Cappa CD, Barreda S, Bouvier NM, Ristenpart WD. 2020. Effect of voicing and articulation manner on aerosol particle emission during human speech. PLoS One
15(1):e0227699, PMID: , 10.1371/journal.pone.0227699. 89. Li Y, Yu X, Chen X, Yin J, Zhong W, Zhu L. 2022. Underlying mechanisms for the impacts of molecular structures and water chemistry on the enrichment of poly/perfluoroalkyl substances in aqueous aerosol. Sci Total Environ
803:150003, PMID: , 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150003. 90. Bhhatarai B, Gramatica P. 2011. Prediction of aqueous solubility, vapor pressure and critical micelle concentration for aquatic partitioning of perfluorinated chemicals. Environ Sci Technol
45(19):8120–8128, PMID: , 10.1021/es101181g. 91. Moody RP, Chu I. 1995. Dermal exposure to environmental contaminants in the Great Lakes. Environ Health Perspect
103 Suppl 9(suppl 9):103–114, PMID: , 10.1289/ehp.95103s9103. 92. Basil MC, Cardenas-Diaz FL, Kathiriya JJ, Morley MP, Carl J, Brumwell AN, et al. 2022. Human distal airways contain a multipotent secretory cell that can regenerate alveoli. Nature
604(7904):120–126, PMID: , 10.1038/s41586-022-04552-0. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. 